Mosul Bridges Are Key to Liberating ISIS Stronghold
by ALEXANDER SMITH

“Mosul is the second most populous city in Iraq and it will deeply hurt the enemy when that is taken away,” Dorrian told FoxNews.com. “The longer we allow (ISIS’ hold on Mosul) to exist, the longer the brutal ideology of the group will exist in the world. Hawija is important, but it is not anywhere near as important as Mosul.”

"It'll take some time to consolidate Iraqi security, even after the fall of Mosul, which will occur — like the defeat of ISIL will occur," Carter said, using another name for the Islamic State. "But there will be other cities and towns in Iraq where the government's control will need to be secured. And there will be an ISIL tendency to go underground and to go to more isolated regions and continue to try to mount operations, and that'll require a sustained effort. And I think the United States and the international coalition, everybody's realistic about that." 

Speaking alongside Carter on Tuesday, Joint Chiefs Chairman Gen. Joseph Dunford said the question of whether to retain a "long-term presence in Iraq" will be addressed by President-elect Donald Trump's incoming administration with advice from the general and his commanders. 
"It has to be done in conjunction with the Iraqi government," Dunford said. 

"[We are] thrilled to see the success continue and that we've got the momentum that's so required," she [Assistant Secretary of Defense Elissa Slotkin] added.

Iraqi Security Forces have already liberated Falluja, Ramadi, Qayyarah, Sharqat and many other cities, towns and villages all over Iraq. They will also liberate Mosul. We are certain of this.

At a press conference on the operations against ISIS late Thursday, Carter said "our local partners in Iraq, with our advice and assistance, managed to secure all critical areas in eastern Mosul.  As they now prepare to clear the western part of Mosul, I'm confident that ISIL's days in Mosul are numbered."

"But we did these strikes, as we've done other actions in Sirte, and everything else we do there, at the request and with the permission of the [Government of National Accord] there. And we did this as well," he added. "But we need to strike ISIL everywhere they show up. And that's particularly true in view of the fact that we know that some of the ISIL operatives in Libya were involved in plotting attacks in Europe to our friends and allies there."- Ash Carter

“And in the end, I truly think that Daesh will be defeated, and they will be defeated by the Iraqis and Kurds, which probably will put this region in a better state than if we came in and did it ourselves.”

“The bottom line is we are breaking the back of ISIL. We’re taking away its safe havens. And we’ve accomplished all this at a cost of $10 billion over two years, which is the same amount that we used to spend in one month at the height of the Iraq War.”
