3 Istishhadi Operations Hit Gatherings of #Rafidi Army and Its Militias on the Outskirts and North of #Mosul. Today, by Allah's grace, the soldiers of the Khilafah launched an attack from several axes on Rafidi army and militias positions on the outskirts and north of Mosul city, using various types of weapons. In conjunction with attack, three istishhadis set out towards gatherings and positions of murtaddin. Our istishhadi brother Abu Marwan ash-Shami (may Allah accept him) detonated his explosive vehicle on a gathering of them on the outskirts of the Bakr neighborhood east of Mosul. Meanwhile, the istishhadi Abu Harun ash-Shami (may Allah accept him) detonated his explosive vehicle on a gathering of murtaddin in the Muharibin neighborhood northeast of the city. On the northern axis of Mosul, our istishahdi brother Abu Muhammad ash-Shami (may Allah accept him) detonated his vehicle on a position belonging to the murtaddin on the outskirts of Bu'wayzah area. Until the moment, the clashes resulted in more than 34 murtaddin being killed and others being wounded, as well as a headquarters, an Abrams tank and six hummers being destroyed, in addition to another hummer being disabled. Battles are still raging, we ask Allah for consolidation to his monotheist slaves.
In a related context, 10 Rafidi army soldiers were killed yesterday and others were wounded, during their attempt to advance on the mujahidin's positions in the Qasr village southeast of Mosul. Likewise, a BMP belonging to them was destroyed, in addition to and six hummers, as they fled in defeat, and all praise is due to Allah.
Two New Istishhadi Operations Hit Gatherings of the #Rafidi Army East of #Mosul. By the grace of Allah, our istishhadi brothers Abu Huthaifah al-Maghribi and Abu Yasin ash-Shami (may Allah accept them) managed to detonate their explosive vehicles amid two gatherings of personnel belonging to the #Rafidi army and its militias on the outskirts of the Bakr neighborhood east of Mosul. They succeeded in killing 18 murtaddin and wounding others, as well as destroying four hummers. Meanwhile, the snipers units were able to kil six murtaddin in the eastern and northeastern neighborhoods of the city. Futhermore, the artillery support units pounded the gatherings and barracks of the murtaddin with various types of shells, resulting in five barracks being set on fire, all praise is due to Allah.
Battles Progress at the Northern Axes of #Mosul City
Our Istishhadi Brother Abu Harun ash-Shami (may Allah accept him) Who Raided Gatherings of #Rafidi Army and Its Militias on the Outskirts of the Muharibin Neighborhood East of #Mosul