WASHINGTON — Al Franken walked onto the Senate floor just before noon Thursday and anxiously scanned the spectator galleries above to find his family. He wanted to make sure they were there in what was going to be the most difficult moment in a short but — until recent days — wildly successful political career.

Mr. Franken, a “Saturday Night Live” comedian turned progressive Democratic hero who was being mentioned seriously as a presidential candidate, was about to relinquish a Minnesota Senate seat he had barely won in the first place in the face of mounting accusations that he fondled and acted inappropriately in the past with several women.

It was an almost unthinkable loss for Mr. Franken, who continued to insist he hadn’t really done anything wrong. But if it was a personal sacrifice, it was one that could help his party in the months ahead by allowing Democrats to draw a sharp distinction between their party and its efforts to hold politicians accountable for sexual harassment and abuse and Republicans, who could be welcoming a man accused of sexually assaulting teenage girls into the Senate as early as next week.

Feelings among Democrats who demanded Mr. Franken’s resignation after another accuser came forward on Wednesday were raw as they watched a much-admired colleague step aside, and they weren’t eager to discuss the political ramifications. But privately, they said the purge of Mr. Franken — and that of Representative John Conyers Jr., the Michigan Democrat and dean of the House, this week — would stand in strong contrast with Republicans and leave their party “unassailable” on the issue.

Republicans were never fans of Mr. Franken, and they avoided the proceedings in droves. They figured it was a Democratic family matter and assumed that Mr. Franken would no doubt point out similar accusations against both President Trump and Roy S. Moore, the Republican candidate for Senate in Alabama who is accused of preying on teenage girls while in his 30s. But the lone Republican who sat on the Senate floor to listen to Mr. Franken, Senator Jeff Flake of Arizona, acknowledged that the resignation would make Mr. Moore’s arrival in the Senate that much harder to take, should he win on Tuesday.

“It just adds another level of difficulty,” he said.

It was a funereal moment in the Senate as tears were shed on the floor, in the spectator’s gallery and among the Franken aides seated somberly on a bench against the back wall on the Democratic side of the chamber. Mr. Franken himself remained composed and was at times defiant, saying that he was confident that he would be exonerated by an ethics investigation but that he had lost his effectiveness as a senator.

“There is a big part of me that will always regret having to walk away from this job with so much work to be done,” Mr. Franken said.

The two top Senate Democrats — Chuck Schumer of New York and Richard J. Durbin of Illinois — turned in their seats to listen to their junior colleague who had meant so much to the party upon his arrival in July 2009 after a contested recount of an election that he noted Thursday he won by a whopping 312 votes. (His re-election in 2014 was much more convincing.)

Not only was Mr. Franken a celebrity with appeal to younger voters and a new face for the party at the start of Barack Obama’s presidency, but he also became the crucial 60th Democratic vote, giving the party a supermajority able to overcome Republican filibusters to enact the Affordable Care Act and other elements of the first-term agenda of the Obama administration.

After he finished his remarks, colleagues gathered around him to offer an embrace, a handshake and words of comfort. Just hours before, most had called for him to step down, making his efforts to remain in the Senate untenable.

But Mr. Franken’s tone was also found wanting: Some female Democratic senators suggested that they were surprised and disheartened that he did not take more responsibility for his acts.

“I am extremely disappointed in Senator Franken,” Senator Catherine Cortez Masto, a freshman Democrat from Nevada who was not on the floor during Mr. Franken’s remarks, said in a statement afterward. “The experiences shared by the brave women who have come forward show a disturbing pattern of behavior.”

Mr. Franken’s resignation became inevitable in recent days. Democratic women were increasingly uncomfortable with his continuing in office, saying it put them in a difficult position by having to constantly explain why he was allowed to serve while they criticized Mr. Moore. And the sudden resignation under pressure of Mr. Conyers, one of the founders of the Congressional Black Caucus, opened Democrats to a charge of a double standard if they countenanced Mr. Franken remaining in the Senate.

Multiple officials said Senate Democrats were leaning toward pressing for Mr. Franken to step down even before a new accusation arose Wednesday, explaining why a half-dozen women were ready to rapidly issue statements calling for his resignation at a pace that seemed coordinated but was not, according to aides.

Mr. Franken said he would formally resign in the “coming weeks” — a timetable that allows a smoother transition and keeps the Minnesota seat occupied by a Democrat with some major year-end issues piling up in the Senate.

But he will soon be going, one of the first in what is beginning to seem like a potential parade off Capitol Hill by lawmakers whose past behavior is catching up with them during a galvanizing period when it comes to sexual behavior. Later Thursday, Representative Trent Franks, Republican of Arizona, said he would resign after the House Ethics Committee began investigating complaints that he had asked two female staff members to be a surrogate to bear his child.

Lawmakers say they hope the cases of Mr. Franken, Mr. Conyers and others lead to a new way of policing sexual harassment and new legislation about the proper disposition of such episodes on Capitol Hill. If that occurs, Mr. Franken will have had a real impact during his time in the Senate, just not the impact he could have ever imagined when he arrived with such fanfare more than eight years ago.