12:41 PM - 2 Jan 2017

Clearly ISIS militants are desperately trying to sow unrest in Iraq, reverting to guerrilla tactics and trying to scare the population into submission, Catherine Shakdam, Shafaqna Institute for...
rt.com

MM: Not at all. They are not in the city yet. They are only on the outskirts. They are maybe roughly about 30 miles out. They haven’t even penetrated the city, which still has more than a million people. That is going to be house to house, room to room, virtually. It probably will take all of next year. They anticipated that this thing would be over in a few weeks, and then it was going to be a few months. I think it is going to be almost a whole year if they can hold out, and if they have the stamina to deal with it. When you’re dealing with a city like that, where people are being held hostage, it is going to be very, very hard.
Plus, ISIS [Islamic State/ISIL] has a strategy in this case. They are going to go ahead and hit in other areas of the country, as they have in Baghdad just the last day or so. And this is to set the Iraqi military off balance. That is part of the strategy. It is going to make it much more difficult; it will cause the diversion of specialized forces to deal with these kinds of developments. Frankly, the Iraqi army doesn’t have enough trained soldiers for this kind of warfare. I don’t know what their longevity is going to be, but we’ve got to also wait for what the Trump administration plans to do about putting in forces. He could decide – I am not saying he will – to put in overwhelming forces and give US military a more active role. I don’t know. Certainly, the forces that we have there now are seeing combat frankly. There are sufficient numbers in order to really get the job effectively done.

Pentagon Confirms Americans Are in Mosul as Number of U.S. Advisers in Iraq Doubles

The number of U.S.-led coalition advisers in Iraq has nearly doubled in size to 450, a move that reflects the intensified offensive to retake Mosul, the last major Islamic State (ISIS/ISIS) stronghold in the country.
Those advisers have entered Mosul alongside American and Iraqi forces, revealed U.S. Air Force Col. John Dorrian, a Baghdad-based spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition.

RT: Is there anything in the timing of the publication of this report – January 2? Was Washington hoping the public might overlook it during the holiday season perhaps?
MM: Well, it’s always the case. Whenever they want something out that is controversial, they either do it on a Friday night or over a long holiday period, such as we’re going through right now. The report itself states there are 118 civilian deaths. This is totally unacceptable. I think they want to avoid having the mainstream media focus attention. I haven’t seen it on any mainstream media here in the US at all. So, it’s just come to be accepted. I might add that the Pentagon tends to regard an area that is very, very critical, as assuming that there will be certain amount of collateral damage. It is not their families, but it is innocent people who are being killed to hit a “high-value target,” as they call it.