article1.txt stemmerize: 
the european union and japan said on friday that they had final a sweep deal that would creat a free trade area cover more than a quarter of the world economy, push against rise call for protection in much of the west.lead of both parti to the agreement trumpet it strategic, as well as economic, importance. that it was announc just hour after britain and the european union broke a deadlock to start a new round of talk over that countri withdraw from the bloc onli heighten it symbol impact.th so-cal econom partnership agreement, which would be one of the largest free trade deal ever, “demonstr the power polit will of japan and the e.u. to continu to keep the flag of free trade wave high,” the japanes prime minister, shinzo abe, and the presid of the european union execut arm, jean-claud juncker, said in a joint statement.th deal is subject to ratif by lawmak in europ as well as japan, but mr. abe and mr. juncker said that they were confid that onc in place, it would “deliv sustain and inclus econom growth, and spur job creation.”“it send a clear signal to the world that the e.u. and japan are commit to keep the world economi work on the basi of free, open and fair market with clear and transpar rule fulli respect and enhanc our values, fight the temptat of protectionism,” the leader added.th agreement also reaffirm it parti commit to the pari climat accord, from which the trump administr has said it will withdraw.tokyo and brussel began trade talk in 2013, and said in june that they were near a deal. japan trade less with the european union than it doe with the unit state or china. but complet a deal with the european union becam a more urgent prioriti for tokyo after presid trump decis in januari to withdraw the unit state from anoth agreement, the trans-pacif partnership. japan has also push to reviv that deal, even without the unit states.japan had effect paus it talk with the european union while it focus on the larger pacif rim deal, which includ 10 other nation along with the unit state and japan. mr. abe has made liber trade a centerpiec of his econom agenda — a notabl shift in a countri that, despit it success export cars, electron and other merchandise, had long shi away from trade deals.th chang of direct on trade owe part to the wane power of japan farm lobby, which has fought to keep tariff on import agricultur product high, imped the countri abil to strike agreements. japanes negoti still focus much of their effort on protect farmers, but with japan rural popul rapid age and shrinking, govern no longer see make concess on agricultur as polit fatal.th european union and japan have a combin annual econom output of around $20 trillion, and togeth would constitut a trade area rough the size of the one creat by the north american free trade agreement. the futur of nafta, which compris the unit states, canada and mexico, has also been cast into doubt by tens renegotiations.still, while japan and the european union have express confid over the agreement they announc on friday, polit interest are still at play. nation and some region legislatur in europ will have a say, a process that near derail a trade deal with canada.th main beneficiari from the agreement are like to be japanes carmak and european food and beverag producers.th deal will make it easier for european produc of cheese, beef, wine and process meat to sell in japan, which impos duti of as much as 40 percent on some products. european maker of pharmaceuticals, medic equip and train are also expect to come out ahead.th pact also present japanes carmak with an opportun to increas sale in europe, which has long been difficult for them. toyota and other japanes manufactur have onli a 13 percent share of the auto market in the european union, in part becaus of import tariffs, compar to the unit state where they account for about 40 percent.but japan carmak alreadi have major manufactur oper in europ which are not subject to import duties, suggest that their meager sale also stem from lack of product that appeal to european tastes.whil the pact will be import for some industries, said angel talavera, senior eurozon economist at oxford econom in britain, it overal econom impact will be modest.th agreement “doe not materi alter the outlook for the eurozone, as japan repres onli around 2 percent of total exports,” mr. talavera said in an email. “i don't think this is a game changer.”

article1.txt lemmatize: 
the european union and japan say on friday that -PRON- have finalize a sweeping deal that would create a free trade area cover more than a quarter of the world ’s economy , push against rise call for protectionism in much of the west . leader of both party to the agreement trumpet -PRON- strategic , as well as economic , importance . that -PRON- be announce just hour after britain and the european union break a deadlock to start a new round of talk over that country ’s withdrawal from the bloc only heighten -PRON- symbolic impact . the so - call economic partnership agreement , which would be one of the large free trade deal ever , " demonstrate the powerful political will of japan and the e.u. to continue to keep the flag of free trade wave high , " the japanese prime minister , shinzo abe , and the president of the european union ’s executive arm , jean - claude juncker , say in a joint statement . the deal be subject to ratification by lawmaker in europe as well as japan , but mr. abe and mr. juncker say that -PRON- be confident that once in place , -PRON- would " deliver sustainable and inclusive economic growth , and spur job creation.”“it send a clear signal to the world that the e.u. and japan be commit to keep the world economy work on the basis of free , open and fair market with clear and transparent rule fully respect and enhance -PRON- value , fight the temptation of protectionism , " the leader add . the agreement also reaffirm -PRON- parties’ commitment to the paris climate accord , from which the trump administration have say -PRON- will withdraw . tokyo and brussels begin trade talk in 2013 , and say in june that -PRON- be near a deal . japan trade less with the european union than -PRON- do with the united states or china . but complete a deal with the european union become a more urgent priority for tokyo after president trump ’s decision in january to withdraw the united states from another agreement , the trans - pacific partnership . japan have also push to revive that deal , even without the united states . japan have effectively pause -PRON- talk with the european union while -PRON- focus on the large pacific rim deal , which include 10 other nation along with the united states and japan . mr. abe have make liberalize trade a centerpiece of -PRON- economic agenda -- a notable shift in a country that , despite -PRON- success export car , electronic and other merchandise , have long shy away from trade deal . the change of direction on trade owe partly to the wan power of japan ’s farm lobby , which have fight to keep tariff on import agricultural product high , impede the country ’s ability to strike agreement . japanese negotiator still focus much of -PRON- effort on protect farmer , but with japan ’s rural population rapidly age and shrink , government no longer see make concession on agriculture as politically fatal . the european union and japan have a combine annual economic output of around $ 20 trillion , and together would constitute a trading area roughly the size of the one create by the north american free trade agreement . the future of nafta , which comprise the united states , canada and mexico , have also be cast into doubt by tense renegotiation . still , while japan and the european union have express confidence over the agreement -PRON- announce on friday , political interest be still at play . national and some regional legislature in europe will have a say , a process that nearly derail a trade deal with canada . the main beneficiary from the agreement be likely to be japanese carmaker and european food and beverage producer . the deal will make -PRON- easy for european producer of cheese , beef , wine and process meat to sell in japan , which impose duty of as much as 40 percent on some product . european maker of pharmaceutical , medical equipment and train be also expect to come out ahead . the pact also present japanese carmaker with an opportunity to increase sale in europe , which have long be difficult for -PRON- . toyota and other japanese manufacturer have only a 13 percent share of the auto market in the european union , in part because of import tariff , compare to the united states where -PRON- account for about 40 percent . but japan ’s carmaker already have major manufacturing operation in europe which be not subject to import duty , suggest that -PRON- meager sale also stem from lack of product that appeal to european taste . while the pact will be important for some industry , say angel talavera , senior eurozone economist at oxford economics in britain , -PRON- overall economic impact will be modest . the agreement " do not materially alter the outlook for the eurozone , as japan represent only around 2 percent of total export , " mr. talavera say in an email . " -PRON- do not think this be a game changer . "

article1.txt sentence_sentiment_distribution: 
very positivepositivenegativeneutral

article1.txt quote_extractor: 
The so-called economic partnership agreement, which would be one of the largest free trade deals ever, “demonstrates the powerful political will of Japan and the E.U.The deal is subject to ratification by lawmakers in Europe as well as Japan, but Mr. Abe and Mr. Juncker said that they were confident that once in place, it would “deliver sustainable and inclusive economic growth, and spur job creation.”

“It sends a clear signal to the world that the E.U.The agreement “does not materially alter the outlook for the eurozone, as Japan represents only around 2 percent of total exports,” Mr. Talavera said in an email.“I don’t think this is a game changer.”

article1.txt stop_word_filter: 
The European Union Japan said Friday finalized sweeping deal would create free trade area covering quarter world ’ economy, pushing rising calls protectionism much West. Leaders parties agreement trumpeted strategic, well economic, importance. That announced hours Britain European Union broke deadlock start new round talks country ’ withdrawal bloc heightened symbolic impact. The so-called economic partnership agreement, would one largest free trade deals ever, “demonstrates powerful political Japan E.U. continue keep flag free trade waving high, ” Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, president European Union ’ executive arm, Jean-Claude Juncker, said joint statement. The deal subject ratification lawmakers Europe well Japan, Mr. Abe Mr. Juncker said confident place, would“ deliver sustainable inclusive economic growth, spur job creation. ” “It sends clear signal world E.U. Japan committed keeping world economy working basis free, open fair markets clear transparent rules fully respecting enhancing values, fighting temptation protectionism, ” leaders added. The agreement also reaffirms parties ’ commitment Paris climate accord, Trump administration said withdraw. Tokyo Brussels began trade talks 2013, said June nearing deal. Japan trades less European Union United States China. But completing deal European Union became urgent priority Tokyo President Trump ’ decision January withdraw United States another agreement, Trans-Pacific Partnership. Japan also pushed revive deal, even without United States. Japan effectively paused talks European Union focused larger Pacific Rim deal, included 10 nations along United States Japan. Mr. Abe made liberalizing trade centerpiece economic agenda — notable shift country, despite success exporting cars, electronics merchandise, long shied away trade deals. The change direction trade owes partly waning power Japan ’ farm lobby, fought keep tariffs imported agricultural products high, impeding country ’ ability strike agreements. Japanese negotiators still focus much efforts protecting farmers, Japan ’ rural population rapidly aging shrinking, governments longer see making concessions agriculture politically fatal. The European Union Japan combined annual economic output around $20 trillion, together would constitute trading area roughly size one created North American Free Trade Agreement. The future Nafta, comprises United States, Canada Mexico, also cast doubt tense renegotiations. Still, Japan European Union expressed confidence agreement announced Friday, political interests still play. National regional legislatures Europe say, process nearly derailed trade deal Canada. The main beneficiaries agreement likely Japanese carmakers European food beverage producers. The deal make easier European producers cheese, beef, wine processed meat sell Japan, imposes duties much 40 percent products. European makers pharmaceuticals, medical equipment trains also expected come ahead. The pact also presents Japanese carmakers opportunity increase sales Europe, long difficult. Toyota Japanese manufacturers 13 percent share auto market European Union, part import tariffs, compared United States account 40 percent. But Japan ’ carmakers already major manufacturing operations Europe subject import duties, suggesting meager sales also stem lack products appeal European tastes. While pact important industries, said Angel Talavera, senior eurozone economist Oxford Economics Britain, overall economic impact modest. The agreement“ materially alter outlook eurozone, Japan represents around 2 percent total exports, ” Mr. Talavera said email. “I ’ think game changer. ”

article1.txt calculate_stopword_frequency: 
arabicazerbaijanidanishdutchenglishfinnishfrenchgermangreekhungarianitaliankazakhnepalinorwegianportugueseromanianrussianspanishswedishturkish

============================================================

article2.txt stemmerize: 
jerusalem — palestinian protest head in their hundr for the gaza border after friday prayer to confront isra soldiers, and clash at militari checkpoint across the west bank. in amman, jordan, demonstr held larg poster of presid trump bear the word “go to hell.” muslim ralli from beirut, lebanon, to tehran.in gaza, palestinian health offici report one death and more than 30 injuri by midafternoon from isra fire along the border. in the west bank, more than 20 protest were said to have been wounded, most by rubber-tip bullets.palestinian demonstr in qusra village, south of the west bank citi of nablus. mani protest head by the hundr for the gaza border after friday prayer to confront isra soldiers. credit jaafar ashtiyeh/ag france-press — getti imagesbut the enorm outburst of violenc that had been fear after mr. trump decis to formal recogn jerusalem as the capit of israel did not immedi materialize. in the holi citi itself, the main friday prayer at al aqsa mosqu was held without incident, accord to the isra police, and the crowd that gather afterward dispers larg peacefully. three palestinian were arrest at the damascus gate entranc to the old citi after scuffl with the police, micki rosenfeld, a polic spokesman, said.on possibl reason for relat calm in the citi at the center of the storm was that the isra polic did not tri to bar young palestinian men from attend the noon prayer at al aqsa mosque, someth it had done dure previous tens periods. limit entri to the rever mosqu compound has further inflam passion in the past.th polic said they had not impos age restrict becaus they had seen no indic that the prayer in jerusalem would turn violent.palestinian also protest and clash with isra forc in east jerusalem, in palestinian citi across the west bank and along the gaza border on thursday, a day after mr. trump announcement. again, the popular reaction was less intens than had initi been feared.hamas, the islam milit group that domin gaza, demand a “day of rage” on friday, call on palestinian to confront isra forc wherev they could, and for the start of a new intifada, or popular uprising.th west bank-bas palestinian authority, led by presid mahmoud abba and domin by the mainstream fatah party, is a bitter rival of hama but is tri for reconcili after a decade-long schism. mr. abba has repeat state that he doe not want a third intifada to break out on his watch, underscor the abid intern division.protest scuffl with secur offic after friday prayer in jerusalem. credit baz ratner/reutersanoth factor might have ad to the tensions: palestinian are mark the 30th anniversari this month of the start of the first intifada, an upris against isra occup that began in gaza, quick spread to the west bank and led to hundr of deaths, most of them of palestinians.in a statement on friday, hama cite the intifada, which the palestinian fought most with stone and firebombs, call it “our proud revolution,” one among a string of past and futur uprisings. the second intifada, which broke out in 2000, was mark by dead suicid bombings.ref to mr. trump decision, the hama statement added, “ani attempt to falsifi realiti and histori will not succeed.”palestinian medic worker care for a man wound dure a demonstr in gaza city. credit mahmud hams/ag france-press — getti imagesmr. trump declaration, which was wide condemn intern — the status of the entir citi has tradit been left as a matter for peac negoti — has also stir emot and garner furious respons from leader throughout the arab and muslim world.in beirut, hassan nasrallah, the leader of the milit organ hezbollah, call on thursday for arab and muslim to respond ani way they could. if palestinian decid to start anoth intifada, he said, everyon should back them with the mean at their disposal, whether that meant weapons, money or moral support.thousand ralli in beirut and resid of palestinian refuge camp were buse in to join the protest. “i'v onli ever seen jerusalem in pictures,” said abdullah mustafa, a teenag from a refuge family. “but it my life.”a hama ralli on friday at the jabaliya refuge camp in the gaza strip. credit moham abed/ag france-press — getti imagesin cairo, a preacher at al azhar mosque, an ancient bastion of sunni muslim scholarship, rail against what he term mr. trump “illegal” decision, which he liken to attack on christian church by the islam state milit group. as prayer ended, congreg stood up chant “we sacrific our soul and blood for you, aqsa,” in refer to the mosqu rever as the third-holiest site in islam.in tehran, state-back ralli were held after friday prayer. the hard-lin imam ahmad khatami said dure his sermon that “all the world is protest trump decision,” adding: “some of the statesmen in america believ he has a mental problem and must receiv treatment from doctors.”“w have missil with a rang of 1,500 kilometers,” mr. khatami continued, cite a distanc of rough 930 miles, which could make israel a possibl target. “we can use those to caus insomnia for the resid of the white house.”

article2.txt lemmatize: 
jerusalem -- palestinian protester head in -PRON- hundred for the gaza border after friday prayer to confront israeli soldier , and clash at military checkpoint across the west bank . in amman , jordan , demonstrator hold large poster of president trump bear the word " go to hell . " muslims rally from beirut , lebanon , to tehran . in gaza , palestinian health official report one death and more than 30 injury by midafternoon from israeli fire along the border . in the west bank , more than 20 protester be say to have be wound , mostly by rubber - tip bullet . palestinian demonstrator in qusra village , south of the west bank city of nablus . many protester head by the hundred for the gaza border after friday prayer to confront israeli soldier . credit jaafar ashtiyeh / agence france - presse -- getty imagesbut the enormous outburst of violence that have be fear after mr. trump ’s decision to formally recognize jerusalem as the capital of israel do not immediately materialize . in the holy city -PRON- , the main friday prayer at al aqsa mosque be hold without incident , accord to the israeli police , and the crowd that gather afterward disperse largely peacefully . three palestinians be arrest at the damascus gate entrance to the old city after scuffle with the police , micky rosenfeld , a police spokesman , say . one possible reason for relative calm in the city at the center of the storm be that the israeli police do not try to bar young palestinian man from attend the noon prayer at al aqsa mosque , something -PRON- have do during previous tense period . limit entry to the revere mosque compound have further inflame passion in the past . the police say -PRON- have not impose age restriction because -PRON- have see no indication that the prayer in jerusalem would turn violent . palestinians also protest and clash with israeli force in east jerusalem , in palestinian city across the west bank and along the gaza border on thursday , a day after mr. trump ’s announcement . again , the popular reaction be less intense than have initially be fear . hamas , the islamic militant group that dominate gaza , demand a " day of rage " on friday , call on palestinians to confront israeli force wherever -PRON- could , and for the start of a new intifada , or popular uprising . the west bank - base palestinian authority , lead by president mahmoud abbas and dominate by the mainstream fatah party , be a bitter rival of hamas but be try for reconciliation after a decade - long schism . mr. abbas have repeatedly state that -PRON- do not want a third intifada to break out on -PRON- watch , underscore the abide internal division . protester scuffle with security officer after friday prayer in jerusalem . credit baz ratner / reutersanother factor may have add to the tension : palestinians be mark the 30th anniversary this month of the start of the first intifada , an uprising against israeli occupation that begin in gaza , quickly spread to the west bank and lead to hundred of death , most of -PRON- of palestinians . in a statement on friday , hamas cite the intifada , which the palestinians fight mostly with stone and firebomb , call -PRON- " -PRON- proud revolution , " one among a string of past and future uprising . the second intifada , which break out in 2000 , be mark by deadly suicide bombing . refer to mr. trump ’s decision , the hamas statement add , " any attempt to falsify reality and history will not succeed.”palestinian medical worker care for a man wound during a demonstration in gaza city . credit mahmud hams / agence france - presse -- getty imagesmr . trump ’s declaration , which be widely condemn internationally -- the status of the entire city have traditionally be leave as a matter for peace negotiation -- have also stir emotion and garner furious response from leader throughout the arab and muslim world . in beirut , hassan nasrallah , the leader of the militant organization hezbollah , call on thursday for arabs and muslims to respond any way -PRON- could . if palestinians decide to start another intifada , -PRON- say , everyone should back -PRON- with the mean at -PRON- disposal , whether that mean weapon , money or moral support . thousand rally in beirut and resident of palestinian refugee camp be bus in to join the protest . " -PRON- have only ever see jerusalem in picture , " say abdullah mustafa , a teenager from a refugee family . " but -PRON- ’ -PRON- life.”a hamas rally on friday at the jabaliya refugee camp in the gaza strip . credit mohammed abed / agence france - presse -- getty imagesin cairo , a preacher at al azhar mosque , an ancient bastion of sunni muslim scholarship , rail against what -PRON- term mr. trump ’s " illegal " decision , which -PRON- liken to attack on christian church by the islamic state militant group . as prayer end , congregant stand up chant " -PRON- sacrifice -PRON- soul and blood for -PRON- , aqsa , " in reference to the mosque revere as the third - holy site in islam . in tehran , state - back rally be hold after friday prayer . the hard - line imam ahmad khatami say during -PRON- sermon that " all the world be protest trump ’s decision , " add : " some of the statesman in america believe -PRON- have a mental problem and must receive treatment from doctors.”“we have missile with a range of 1,500 kilometer , " mr. khatami continue , cite a distance of roughly 930 mile , which could make israel a possible target . " -PRON- can use those to because insomnia for the resident of the white house . "

article2.txt sentence_sentiment_distribution: 
negativepositiveneutralvery negative

article2.txt quote_extractor: 
In Amman, Jordan, demonstrators held large posters of President Trump bearing the words “Go to hell.” Muslims rallied from Beirut, Lebanon, to Tehran.Hamas, the Islamic militant group that dominates Gaza, demanded a “day of rage” on Friday, calling on Palestinians to confront Israeli forces wherever they could, and for the start of a new intifada, or popular uprising.In a statement on Friday, Hamas cited the intifada, which the Palestinians fought mostly with stones and firebombs, calling it “our proud revolution,” one among a string of past and future uprisings.Referring to Mr. Trump’s decision, the Hamas statement added, “Any attempt to falsify reality and history will not succeed.”

Palestinian medical workers cared for a man wounded during a demonstration in Gaza City.“I’ve only ever seen Jerusalem in pictures,” said Abdullah Mustafa, a teenager from a refugee family.“But it’s my life.”

A Hamas rally on Friday at the Jabaliya refugee camp in the Gaza Strip.Credit Mohammed Abed/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
In Cairo, a preacher at Al Azhar Mosque, an ancient bastion of Sunni Muslim scholarship, railed against what he termed Mr. Trump’s “illegal” decision, which he likened to attacks on Christian churches by the Islamic State militant group.As prayers ended, congregants stood up chanting “We sacrifice our souls and blood for you, Aqsa,” in reference to the mosque revered as the third-holiest site in Islam.The hard-line imam Ahmad Khatami said during his sermon that “all the world is protesting Trump’s decision,” adding: “Some of the statesmen in America believe he has a mental problem and must receive treatment from doctors.”

“We have missiles with a range of 1,500 kilometers,” Mr. Khatami continued, citing a distance of roughly 930 miles, which could make Israel a possible target.“We can use those to cause insomnia for the residents of the White House.”

article2.txt stop_word_filter: 
JERUSALEM — Palestinian protesters headed hundreds Gaza border Friday Prayer confront Israeli soldiers, clashed military checkpoints across West Bank. In Amman, Jordan, demonstrators held large posters President Trump bearing words “Go hell. ” Muslims rallied Beirut, Lebanon, Tehran. In Gaza, Palestinian health officials reported one death 30 injuries midafternoon Israeli fire along border. In West Bank, 20 protesters said wounded, mostly rubber-tipped bullets. Palestinian demonstrators Qusra Village, south West Bank city Nablus. Many protesters headed hundreds Gaza border Friday Prayer confront Israeli soldiers. Credit Jaafar Ashtiyeh/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images But enormous outburst violence feared Mr. Trump ’ decision formally recognize Jerusalem capital Israel immediately materialize. In holy city, main Friday Prayer Al Aqsa Mosque held without incident, according Israeli police, crowds gathered afterward dispersed largely peacefully. Three Palestinians arrested Damascus Gate entrance Old City scuffling police, Micky Rosenfeld, police spokesman, said. One possible reason relative calm city center storm Israeli police try bar young Palestinian men attending noon prayer Al Aqsa Mosque, something done previous tense periods. Limiting entry revered mosque compound inflamed passions past. The police said imposed age restrictions seen indications prayer Jerusalem would turn violent. Palestinians also protested clashed Israeli forces East Jerusalem, Palestinian cities across West Bank along Gaza border Thursday, day Mr. Trump ’ announcement. Again, popular reaction less intense initially feared. Hamas, Islamic militant group dominates Gaza, demanded“ day rage ” Friday, calling Palestinians confront Israeli forces wherever could, start new intifada, popular uprising. The West Bank-based Palestinian Authority, led President Mahmoud Abbas dominated mainstream Fatah party, bitter rival Hamas trying reconciliation decade-long schism. Mr. Abbas repeatedly stated want third intifada break watch, underscoring abiding internal division. Protesters scuffled security officers Friday Prayer Jerusalem. Credit Baz Ratner/Reuters Another factor might added tensions: Palestinians marking 30th anniversary month start first intifada, uprising Israeli occupation began Gaza, quickly spread West Bank led hundreds deaths, Palestinians. In statement Friday, Hamas cited intifada, Palestinians fought mostly stones firebombs, calling “proud revolution, ” one among string past future uprisings. The second intifada, broke 2000, marked deadly suicide bombings. Referring Mr. Trump ’ decision, Hamas statement added,“ Any attempt falsify reality history succeed. ” Palestinian medical workers cared man wounded demonstration Gaza City. Credit Mahmud Hams/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images Mr. Trump ’ declaration, widely condemned internationally — status entire city traditionally left matter peace negotiations — also stirred emotions garnered furious responses leaders throughout Arab Muslim world. In Beirut, Hassan Nasrallah, leader militant organization Hezbollah, called Thursday Arabs Muslims respond way could. If Palestinians decided start another intifada, said, everyone back means disposal, whether meant weapons, money moral support. Thousands rallied Beirut residents Palestinian refugee camps bused join protest. “I ’ ever seen Jerusalem pictures, ” said Abdullah Mustafa, teenager refugee family.“ But ’ life. ” A Hamas rally Friday Jabaliya refugee camp Gaza Strip. Credit Mohammed Abed/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images In Cairo, preacher Al Azhar Mosque, ancient bastion Sunni Muslim scholarship, railed termed Mr. Trump ’ “illegal ” decision, likened attacks Christian churches Islamic State militant group. As prayers ended, congregants stood chanting“ We sacrifice souls blood, Aqsa, ” reference mosque revered third-holiest site Islam. In Tehran, state-backed rallies held Friday Prayer. The hard-line imam Ahmad Khatami said sermon “world protesting Trump ’ decision, ” adding:“ Some statesmen America believe mental problem must receive treatment doctors. ” “We missiles range 1,500 kilometers, ” Mr. Khatami continued, citing distance roughly 930 miles, could make Israel possible target.“ We use cause insomnia residents White House. ”

article2.txt calculate_stopword_frequency: 
arabicazerbaijanidanishdutchenglishfinnishfrenchgermangreekhungarianitaliankazakhnepalinorwegianportugueseromanianrussianspanishswedishturkish

============================================================

article3.txt stemmerize: 
the media echo chamber spent the week specul about whether special counsel robert mueller can or will nab presid trump on obstruction-of-justic charges. all the while it continu to ignor washington most obvious obstruction—th coordin effort to thwart congression probe of the role law enforc play in the 2016 election.th news that senior fbi agent peter strzok exchang anti-trump, pro-hillari text messag with anoth fbi offici matters—though we'v yet to see the content. the bigger scandal is that the justic department, the feder bureau of investig and mr. mueller have known about those text for month and deliber kept their exist from congress. the hous intellig committe sent document subpoena and demand an interview with mr. strzok. the justic depart dodged, and then leaked.th depart also withheld from congress that anoth top official, associ deputi attorney general bruce ohr, was in contact with ex-spook christoph steel and the opposition-research firm fusion gps. it has refus to say what role the steel dossier—clinton-commiss oppo research—play in it trump investigation. it won't turn over file about it wiretapping.and mr. mueller—who is well awar the hous is probe all this, and consid the strzok text relev enough to earn the agent a demotion—nonetheless did not inform congress about the matter. why? perhap mr. mueller feel he abov be bother with ani other investigation. or perhap his team is cover for the fbi and the justic department.when deputi attorney general rod rosenstein appoint mr. mueller, he stress that he want a probe with “independ from the normal chain of command.” yet the mueller team is made up of the same command who were previous run the trump show at the justic depart and the fbi, and hard distant from their old office.andrew weissmann, mr. mueller deputy, is chief of the justic depart crimin fraud section and was onc fbi general counsel. until mr. strzok demotion, he was a top fbi counterintellig officer, lead on the trump probe. michael dreeben is a deputi solicitor general. elizabeth prelogar, brandon van grack, kyle freeny, adam jed, andrew goldstein —everi one is a high placed, influenti lawyer on loan from the justic department. lisa page —mr. strzok mistress, with whom he exchang those texts—wa on loan from the fbi general counsel office.do anyon think this crowd intend to investig justic depart or fbi misdeeds? to put it anoth way, doe anyon think they intend to investig themselves? or that they'd investig their longtim colleagues— andrew mccabe, or mr. ohr or mr. strzok? or could we instead just acknowledg the mueller team has enorm person and institut interest in justifi the action their agenc took in 2016—and therefor in stonewal congress?th strzok text rais the addit question of whether those interest extend to take down the president. mr. strzok was eject from team mueller for exhibit anti-trump, pro-clinton behavior. by that standard, one has to wonder how mr. mueller has ani attorney left.judici watch this week releas an email in which mr. weissmann gush about how “proud and in awe” he was of former act attorney general salli yate for stage a mutini against the trump travel ban. of 15 public identifi mueller lawyers, nine are democrat donors—includ sever who gave money to mrs. clinton 2016 campaign. jeanni rhee defend the clinton foundat against racket charges, and repres mrs. clinton person in the question of her emails. aaron zebley repres justin cooper, the clinton aid who help manag her server. mr. goldstein work for preet bharara, whom mr. trump fire and who is now a vigor trump critic. the question isn't whether these peopl are legal allow (under the hatch act) to investig mr. trump—a the left keep insisting. the question is whether a team of declar democrat is capabl of imparti investig a republican president.som want attorney general jeff session to clean house, although this would requir fire a huge number of career justic depart lawyers. some want mr. trump to fire mr. mueller—which would be counterproductive. some have call for a special counsel to investig the special counsel, but that way lie infinit regress.ther is a better, more transpar way. mr. session (or mayb even mr. trump) is within right to creat a short-term posit for an offici whose onli job is to ensur justic depart and fbi complianc with congression oversight. this person need to be a straight shooter and vers in law enforcement, but with no histori at or substanti tie to the justic depart or fbi.it would be a first, but we are in an era of firsts. congress is the onli bodi with an interest and abil to get the full stori of 2016 to the public, therebi end this drama quickly. but that requir put an end to the obstruction.

article3.txt lemmatize: 
the medium echo chamber spend the week speculate about whether special counsel robert mueller can or will nab president trump on obstruction - of - justice charge . all the while -PRON- continue to ignore washington ’s most obvious obstruction — the coordinate effort to thwart congressional probe of the role law enforcement play in the 2016 election . the news that senior fbi agent peter strzok exchange anti - trump , pro - hillary text message with another fbi official matter — though -PRON- have yet to see the content . the big scandal be that the justice department , the federal bureau of investigation and mr. mueller have know about those text for month and deliberately keep -PRON- existence from congress . the house intelligence committee send document subpoena and demand an interview with mr. strzok . the justice department dodge , and then leak . the department also withhold from congress that another top official , associate deputy attorney general bruce ohr , be in contact with ex - spook christopher steele and the opposition - research firm fusion gps . -PRON- have refuse to say what role the steele dossier — clinton - commission oppo research — play in -PRON- trump investigation . -PRON- will not turn over file about -PRON- wiretapping . and mr. mueller — who be well aware the house be probe all this , and consider the strzok text relevant enough to earn the agent a demotion — nonetheless do not inform congress about the matter . why ? perhaps mr. mueller feel -PRON- ’ above be bother with any other investigation . or perhaps -PRON- team be cover for the fbi and the justice department . when deputy attorney general rod rosenstein appoint mr. mueller , -PRON- stress that -PRON- want a probe with " independence from the normal chain of command . " yet the mueller team be make up of the same commander who be previously run the trump show at the justice department and the fbi , and hardly distant from -PRON- old office . andrew weissmann , mr. mueller ’s deputy , be chief of the justice department ’s criminal fraud section and be once fbi general counsel . until mr. strzok ’s demotion , -PRON- be a top fbi counterintelligence officer , lead on the trump probe . michael dreeben be a deputy solicitor general . elizabeth prelogar , brandon van grack , kyle freeny , adam jed , andrew goldstein —every one be a highly place , influential lawyer on loan from the justice department . lisa page —mr . strzok ’s mistress , with whom -PRON- exchange those text — be on loan from the fbi general counsel ’s office . do anyone think this crowd intend to investigate justice department or fbi misdeed ? to put -PRON- another way , do anyone think -PRON- intend to investigate -PRON- ? or that -PRON- would investigate -PRON- longtime colleagues— andrew mccabe , or mr. ohr or mr. strzok ? or could -PRON- instead just acknowledge the mueller team have enormous personal and institutional interest in justify the action -PRON- agency take in 2016—and therefore in stonewall congress?the strzok text raise the additional question of whether those interest extend to take down the president . mr. strzok be eject from team mueller for exhibit anti - trump , pro - clinton behavior . by that standard , one have to wonder how mr. mueller have any attorney leave . judicial watch this week release an email in which mr. weissmann gush about how " proud and in awe " -PRON- be of former acting attorney general sally yates for stag a mutiny against the trump travel ban . of 15 publicly identify mueller lawyer , nine be democratic donor — include several who give money to mrs. clinton ’s 2016 campaign . jeannie rhee defend the clinton foundation against racketeering charge , and represent mrs. clinton personally in the question of -PRON- email . aaron zebley represent justin cooper , the clinton aide who help manage -PRON- server . mr. goldstein work for preet bharara , whom mr. trump fire and who be now a vigorous trump critic . the question be not whether these people be legally allow ( under the hatch act ) to investigate mr. trump — as the left keep insist . the question be whether a team of declare democrats be capable of impartially investigate a republican president . some want attorney general jeff sessions to clean house , although this would require fire a huge number of career justice department lawyer . some want mr. trump to fire mr. mueller — which would be counterproductive . some have call for a special counsel to investigate the special counsel , but that way lie infinite regress . there be a good , more transparent way . mr. sessions ( or maybe even mr. trump ) be within right to create a short - term position for an official whose only job be to ensure justice department and fbi compliance with congressional oversight . this person need to be a straight shooter and verse in law enforcement , but with no history at or substantial tie to the justice department or fbi.it would be a first , but -PRON- be in an era of first . congress be the only body with an interest and ability to get the full story of 2016 to the public , thereby end this drama quickly . but that require put an end to the obstruction .

article3.txt sentence_sentiment_distribution: 
neutralpositivenegativevery positive

article3.txt quote_extractor: 
When Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein appointed Mr. Mueller, he stressed that he wanted a probe with “independence from the normal chain of command.” Yet the Mueller team is made up of the same commanders who were previously running the Trump show at the Justice Department and the FBI, and hardly distant from their old office.Judicial Watch this week released an email in which Mr. Weissmann gushed about how “proud and in awe” he was of former acting Attorney General Sally Yates for staging a mutiny against the Trump travel ban.

article3.txt stop_word_filter: 
The media echo chamber spent week speculating whether Special Counsel Robert Mueller nab President Trump obstruction-of-justice charges. All continues ignore Washington ’ obvious obstruction—the coordinated effort thwart congressional probes role law enforcement played 2016 election. The news senior FBI agent Peter Strzok exchanged anti-Trump, pro-Hillary text messages another FBI official matters—though ’ yet see content. The bigger scandal Justice Department, Federal Bureau Investigation Mr. Mueller known texts months deliberately kept existence Congress. The House Intelligence Committee sent document subpoenas demanded interview Mr. Strzok. The Justice Department dodged, leaked. The department also withheld Congress another top official, Associate Deputy Attorney General Bruce Ohr, contact ex-spook Christopher Steele opposition-research firm Fusion GPS. It refused say role Steele dossier—Clinton-commissioned oppo research—played Trump investigation. It ’ turn files wiretapping. And Mr. Mueller—who well aware House probing, considered Strzok texts relevant enough earn agent demotion—nonetheless inform Congress matter. Why? Perhaps Mr. Mueller feels ’ bothered investigation. Or perhaps team covering FBI Justice Department. When Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein appointed Mr. Mueller, stressed wanted probe “independence normal chain command. ” Yet Mueller team made commanders previously running Trump show Justice Department FBI, hardly distant old office. Andrew Weissmann, Mr. Mueller ’ deputy, chief Justice Department ’ criminal fraud section FBI general counsel. Until Mr. Strzok ’ demotion, top FBI counterintelligence officer, lead Trump probe. Michael Dreeben deputy solicitor general. Elizabeth Prelogar, Brandon Van Grack, Kyle Freeny, Adam Jed, Andrew Goldstein —every one highly placed, influential lawyer loan Justice Department. Lisa Page —Mr. Strzok ’ mistress, exchanged texts—was loan FBI general counsel ’ office. Does anyone think crowd intends investigate Justice Department FBI misdeeds? To put another way, anyone think intend investigate? Or ’ investigate longtime colleagues— Andrew McCabe, Mr. Ohr Mr. Strzok? Or could instead acknowledge Mueller team enormous personal institutional interests justifying actions agencies took 2016—and therefore stonewalling Congress? The Strzok texts raise additional question whether interests extend taking president. Mr. Strzok ejected Team Mueller exhibiting anti-Trump, pro-Clinton behavior. By standard, one wonder Mr. Mueller attorneys left. Judicial Watch week released email Mr. Weissmann gushed“ proud awe ” former acting Attorney General Sally Yates staging mutiny Trump travel ban. Of 15 publicly identified Mueller lawyers, nine Democratic donors—including several gave money Mrs. Clinton ’ 2016 campaign. Jeannie Rhee defended Clinton Foundation racketeering charges, represented Mrs. Clinton personally question emails. Aaron Zebley represented Justin Cooper, Clinton aide helped manage server. Mr. Goldstein worked Preet Bharara, Mr. Trump fired vigorous Trump critic. The question ’ whether people legally allowed ( Hatch Act) investigate Mr. Trump—as left keeps insisting. The question whether team declared Democrats capable impartially investigating Republican president. Some want Attorney General Jeff Sessions clean house, although would require firing huge number career Justice Department lawyers. Some want Mr. Trump fire Mr. Mueller—which would counterproductive. Some called special counsel investigate special counsel, way lies infinite regress. There better, transparent way. Mr. Sessions ( maybe even Mr. Trump) within rights create short-term position official whose job ensure Justice Department FBI compliance congressional oversight. This person needs straight shooter versed law enforcement, history substantial ties Justice Department FBI. It would first, era firsts. Congress body interest ability get full story 2016 public, thereby ending drama quickly. But requires putting end obstruction.

article3.txt calculate_stopword_frequency: 
arabicazerbaijanidanishdutchenglishfinnishfrenchgermangreekhungarianitaliankazakhnepalinorwegianportugueseromanianrussianspanishswedishturkish

============================================================

article4.txt stemmerize: 
washington -- we need to prepar for the eventu that the mueller probe catch presid trump, famili member and associ red-hand -- and republican in congress refus to do anyth about it.thi is begin to look like a possibl or even probabl outcome. with it craven match onli by it arrogance, the gop is trump parti now. it no longer has ani claim to be lincoln's.wit the coward about-fac on the subject of roy moor candidaci for the senate. the parti initi took a posit in line with it purport values: that a credibl accus child molester, who haunt the local mall seek date with teenag girl when he was in his 30s, is unworthi of the high offic he seeks.but then trump endors moor -- given that more than a dozen women have accus the presid of sexual misconduct, the phrase "bird of a feather" come to mind -- and republican chang their tune. the flow of money from nation parti coffer to moor campaign, briefli interrupted, was resumed. moor fit becam a matter that no longer troubl the gop moral conscience, or what was left of it; onli "the peopl of alabama" could decid the differ between right and wrong.her is the distinct between our two major parti in 2017: democrat leader are forc rep. john conyers, d-mich., and sen. al franken, d-minn., both accus of harass women, to resign. republican leader are tri to put moore, accus of harass teenag and molest a 14-year-old, in the senate.given that context, it is naiv to assum that anyth special counsel robert mueller uncov will lead republican to choos principl over polit advantage. trump boast dure the campaign that he could shoot someon on fifth avenu and not lose support. as far as the gop major in congress are concerned, he may be right.ultimately, that what trump is count on. he has been use his twitter feed to tri to creat the impress that mueller -- the straightest of straight arrows, and a lifelong republican -- is somehow bias against him. trump aim isn't so much to pull the wool over the eye of his base; rather, it to give hous republican an excus not to start impeach proceed if and when the time comes.i realiz it seem prematur to speak of such eventualities. but if there realli was no collus with russia to tilt the elect in trump favor, i wonder whi one of the presid lawyers, jay sekulow, is argu that such collus would not constitut a crime. and if there realli was no obstruct of justice, i wonder whi anoth of trump lawyers, john dowd, is argu that the presid by virtu of his offic is incap of obstruct justice.perhap trump and his famili are just get bad legal advice. i'm wonder who gave donald trump jr. the bright idea to cite attorney-cli privileg in refus to answer the hous intellig committe question about convers with his father -- convers that might bear on both collus and obstruction.neith trump nor trump jr. is an attorney. convers between trump jr. and his lawyer would be privileged, but not convers trump jr. might have had with someon els while his lawyer was present. and congress is not compel to honor attorney-cli privileg anyway, though it often does.at least trump jr. gave a reason for his stonewalling. other administr offici call to capitol hill to testifi about trump possibl obstruct -- includ attorney general jeff session -- have reli on some imaginari privileg not to discuss convers with the president.th gop-l committe investig the russia affair could subpoena witnesses, compel them to speak and hold them in contempt if they refuse. i'm not hold my breath.thos of us who care whether the presid work with a foreign power to influenc the elect and then activ imped an fbi investig do have recourse, however. i'v said it before, but it bear repeating: if this congress refus to stand up for justic and american ideals, we need to elect a congress that will.th trump presid pose a challeng beyond polit or policy. wronghead trickle-down tax polici is a matter of arithmetic; it can be correct by move number around a spreadsheet. but onc corrupt has becom established, it take herculean effort to root it out; onc respect for the rule of law is lost, it take generat to restore.muel is do his job. our is to elect democrat and independ next year who will hold this appal presid to account.

article4.txt lemmatize: 
washington -- -PRON- need to prepare for the eventuality that the mueller probe catch president trump , family member and associate red - handed -- and republicans in congress refuse to do anything about -PRON- . this be begin to look like a possible or even probable outcome . with -PRON- cravenness match only by -PRON- arrogance , the gop be trump 's party now . -PRON- no longer have any claim to be lincoln's . witness the cowardly about - face on the subject of roy moore 's candidacy for the senate . the party initially take a position in line with -PRON- purported value : that a credibly accuse child molester , who haunt the local mall seek date with teenag girl when -PRON- be in -PRON- 30 , be unworthy of the high office -PRON- seek . but then trump endorse moore -- give that more than a dozen woman have accuse the president of sexual misconduct , the phrase " bird of a feather " come to mind -- and republicans change -PRON- tune . the flow of money from national party coffer to moore 's campaign , briefly interrupt , be resume . moore 's fitness become a matter that no longer trouble the gop 's moral conscience , or what be leave of -PRON- ; only " the people of alabama " could decide the difference between right and wrong . here be the distinction between -PRON- two major party in 2017 : democratic leader be force rep. john conyers , d - mich . , and sen. al franken , d - minn . , both accuse of harass woman , to resign . republican leader be try to put moore , accuse of harass teenager and molest a 14-year - old , in the senate . give that context , -PRON- be naive to assume that anything special counsel robert mueller uncover will lead republicans to choose principle over political advantage . trump boast during the campaign that -PRON- could shoot someone on fifth avenue and not lose support . as far as the gop majority in congress be concern , -PRON- may be right . ultimately , that be what trump be count on . -PRON- have be use -PRON- twitter feed to try to create the impression that mueller -- the straight of straight arrow , and a lifelong republican -- be somehow bias against -PRON- . trump 's aim be not so much to pull the wool over the eye of -PRON- base ; rather , -PRON- be to give house republicans an excuse not to start impeachment proceeding if and when the time come . -PRON- realize -PRON- seem premature to speak of such eventuality . but if there really be no collusion with russia to tilt the election in trump 's favor , -PRON- wonder why one of the president 's lawyer , jay sekulow , be argue that such collusion would not constitute a crime . and if there really be no obstruction of justice , -PRON- wonder why another of trump 's lawyer , john dowd , be argue that the president by virtue of -PRON- office be incapable of obstruct justice . perhaps trump and -PRON- family be just get bad legal advice . -PRON- be wonder who give donald trump jr. the bright idea to cite attorney - client privilege in refuse to answer the house intelligence committee 's question about conversation with -PRON- father -- conversation that may bear on both collusion and obstruction . neither trump nor trump jr. be an attorney . conversation between trump jr. and -PRON- lawyer would be privileged , but not conversation trump jr. may have have with someone else while -PRON- lawyer be present . and congress be not compel to honor attorney - client privilege anyway , though -PRON- often do . at least trump jr. give a reason for -PRON- stonewalling . other administration official call to capitol hill to testify about trump 's possible obstruction -- include attorney general jeff sessions -- have rely on some imaginary privilege not to discuss conversation with the president . the gop - lead committee investigate the russia affair could subpoena witness , compel -PRON- to speak and hold -PRON- in contempt if -PRON- refuse . -PRON- be not hold -PRON- breath . those of -PRON- who care whether the president work with a foreign power to influence the election and then actively impede an fbi investigation do have recourse , however . -PRON- have say -PRON- before , but -PRON- bear repeat : if this congress refuse to stand up for justice and american ideal , -PRON- need to elect a congress that will . the trump presidency pose a challenge beyond politic or policy . wronghead trickle - down tax policy be a matter of arithmetic ; -PRON- can be correct by move number around a spreadsheet . but once corruption have become establish , -PRON- take herculean effort to root -PRON- out ; once respect for the rule of law be lose , -PRON- take generation to restore . mueller be do -PRON- job . -PRON- be to elect democrats and independent next year who will hold this appalling presidency to account .

article4.txt sentence_sentiment_distribution: 
neutralnegativevery negativepositivevery positive

article4.txt quote_extractor: 


article4.txt stop_word_filter: 
WASHINGTON -- We need prepare eventuality Mueller probe catches President Trump, family members associates red-handed -- Republicans Congress refuse anything. This beginning look like possible even probable outcome. With cravenness matched arrogance, GOP Trump's party. It longer claim Lincoln's. Witness cowardly about-face subject Roy Moore's candidacy Senate. The party initially took position line purported values: credibly accused child molester, haunted local mall seeking dates teenaged girls 30s, unworthy high office seeks. But Trump endorsed Moore -- given dozen women accused president sexual misconduct, phrase ``birds feather ''comes mind -- Republicans changed tune. The flow money national party coffers Moore's campaign, briefly interrupted, resumed. Moore's fitness became matter longer troubled GOP's moral conscience, left;`` people Alabama'' could decide difference right wrong. Here distinction two major parties 2017: Democratic leaders forcing Rep. John Conyers, D-Mich., Sen. Al Franken, D-Minn., accused harassing women, resign. Republican leaders trying put Moore, accused harassing teenagers molesting 14-year-old, Senate. Given context, naive assume anything special counsel Robert Mueller uncovers lead Republicans choose principle political advantage. Trump boasted campaign could shoot someone Fifth Avenue lose support. As far GOP majorities Congress concerned, may right. Ultimately,'s Trump counting. He using Twitter feed try create impression Mueller -- straightest straight arrows, lifelong Republican -- somehow biased. Trump's aim n't much pull wool eyes base; rather,'s give House Republicans excuse start impeachment proceedings time comes. I realize seems premature speak eventualities. But really collusion Russia tilt election Trump's favor, I wonder one president's lawyers, Jay Sekulow, arguing collusion would constitute crime. And really obstruction justice, I wonder another Trump's lawyers, John Dowd, arguing president virtue office incapable obstructing justice. Perhaps Trump family getting bad legal advice. I'm wondering gave Donald Trump Jr. bright idea cite attorney-client privilege refusing answer House Intelligence Committee's questions conversations father -- conversations might bear collusion obstruction. Neither Trump Trump Jr. attorney. Conversations Trump Jr. lawyer would privileged, conversations Trump Jr. might someone else lawyer present. And Congress compelled honor attorney-client privilege anyway, though often. At least Trump Jr. gave reason stonewalling. Other administration officials called Capitol Hill testify Trump's possible obstruction -- including Attorney General Jeff Sessions -- relied imaginary privilege discuss conversations president. The GOP-led committees investigating Russia affair could subpoena witnesses, compel speak hold contempt refuse. I'm holding breath. Those us care whether president worked foreign power influence election actively impeded FBI investigation recourse, however. I've said, bears repeating: If Congress refuses stand justice American ideals, need elect Congress. The Trump presidency poses challenge beyond politics policy. Wrongheaded trickle-down tax policy matter arithmetic; corrected moving numbers around spreadsheet. But corruption become established, takes Herculean effort root; respect rule law lost, takes generations restore. Mueller job. Ours elect Democrats independents next year hold appalling presidency account.

article4.txt calculate_stopword_frequency: 
arabicazerbaijanidanishdutchenglishfinnishfrenchgermangreekhungarianitaliankazakhnepalinorwegianportugueseromanianrussianspanishswedishturkish

============================================================

article5.txt stemmerize: 
it been 10 month sinc washington learn that former british spi christoph steele, author of the so-cal "trump dossier," took the hillari clinton-fund opposit research document to the fbi, which consid sponsor the anti-trump work at the height of the 2016 presidenti campaign. now, congression investig have made what is perhap an even more consequenti discovery: knowledg of the dossier project, dure the campaign, extend into the highest level of the obama justic department.th depart bruce ohr, a career official, serv as associ deputi attorney general at the time of the campaign. that place him just below the deputi attorney general, salli yates, who ran the day-to-day oper of the department. in 2016, ohr offic was just step away from yates, who was later fire for defi presid trump initi travel ban execut order and still later becam a promin anti-trump voic upon leav the justic department.unbeknownst to investig until recently, ohr knew steel and had repeat contact with steel when steel was work on the dossier. ohr also met after the elect with glenn simpson, head of fusion gps, the opposit research compani that was paid by the clinton campaign to compil the dossier.word that ohr met with steel and simpson, first report by fox new jame rosen and jake gibson, was news to some current offici in the justic department. short after learn it, they demot ohr, take away his associ deputi attorney general titl and move him full time to anoth posit run the depart organ crime drug enforc task forces.th news also stun some of those who had been investig the matter. yes, they knew that knowledg of the dossier extend to some offici in the fbi. that was bad enough; how could the fbi endors and consid underwrit one campaign dirt-dig oper in the middl of a hot contest election? but now investig know that near the highest level of the obama justic depart were also awar of the dossier.related: whi the fbi director walk a tightrop on the steel dossierinvestig believ the dossier sensat alleg of collus between russia and the trump campaign play a role in the begin of the fbi counterintellig investig into the trump-russia affair — an investig that later morph into special counsel robert mueller probe.hous intellig committe chairman devin nunes, r-calif., whose investig has led to a number of revel about the dossier, was unhappi to learn about such a key piec of inform month after the investig began. ohr contact with steel and simpson were cover by a subpoena nune issu to the fbi and the justic depart on aug. 24. yet as recent as tuesday, when nunes, along with hous oversight committe chairman trey gowdy, r-s.c., met with deputi attorney general rod rosenstein, the depart said noth about ohr role."pursu to the hous intellig committe prior subpoena and inform requests, the depart of justic should have provid the committe with inform on contact that doj offici bruce ohr had with fusion gps repres and christoph steele," nune said in a statement thursday. "the committe will issu a subpoena to bruce ohr for inform on this matter."th ohr revel come not long after word that top fbi agent peter strzok was remov from the mueller investig for anti-trump text messag he exchang with a top fbi lawyer who had also work for the mueller probe. now, with news of ohr contact with steel and simpson, republican on capitol hill — and perhap some democrats, too — will wonder just how far the obama justic depart offici went in the effort to stop trump.

article5.txt lemmatize: 
-PRON- be be 10 month since washington learn that former british spy christopher steele , author of the so - call " trump dossier , " take the hillary clinton - fund opposition research document to the fbi , which consider sponsor the anti - trump work at the height of the 2016 presidential campaign . now , congressional investigator have make what be perhaps an even more consequential discovery : knowledge of the dossier project , during the campaign , extend into the high level of the obama justice department . the department 's bruce ohr , a career official , serve as associate deputy attorney general at the time of the campaign . that place -PRON- just below the deputy attorney general , sally yates , who run the day - to - day operation of the department . in 2016 , ohr 's office be just step away from yates , who be later fire for defy president trump 's initial travel ban executive order and still later become a prominent anti - trump voice upon leave the justice department . unbeknownst to investigator until recently , ohr know steele and have repeat contact with steele when steele be work on the dossier . ohr also meet after the election with glenn simpson , head of fusion gps , the opposition research company that be pay by the clinton campaign to compile the dossier . word that ohr meet with steele and simpson , first report by fox news ' james rosen and jake gibson , be news to some current official in the justice department . shortly after learn -PRON- , -PRON- demote ohr , take away -PRON- associate deputy attorney general title and move -PRON- full time to another position run the department 's organize crime drug enforcement task force . the news also stun some of those who have be investigate the matter . yes , -PRON- know that knowledge of the dossier extend to some official in the fbi . that be bad enough ; how could the fbi endorse and consider underwrite one campaign 's dirt - dig operation in the middle of a hotly contest election ? but now investigator know that nearly the high level of the obama justice department be also aware of the dossier . relate : why the fbi director walk a tightrope on the steele dossierinvestigator believe the dossier 's sensational allegation of collusion between russia and the trump campaign play a role in the beginning of the fbi 's counterintelligence investigation into the trump - russia affair -- an investigation that later morph into special counsel robert mueller 's probe . house intelligence committee chairman devin nunes , r - calif . , whose investigation have lead to a number of revelation about the dossier , be unhappy to learn about such a key piece of information month after the investigation begin . ohr 's contact with steele and simpson be cover by a subpoena nunes issue to the fbi and the justice department on August 24 . yet as recently as tuesday , when nunes , along with house oversight committee chairman trey gowdy , r - s.c. , meet with deputy attorney general rod rosenstein , the department say nothing about ohr 's role."pursuant to the house intelligence committee 's prior subpoena and information request , the department of justice should have provide the committee with information on contact that doj official bruce ohr have with fusion gps representative and christopher steele , " nune say in a statement thursday . " the committee will issue a subpoena to bruce ohr for information on this matter."the ohr revelation come not long after word that top fbi agent peter strzok be remove from the mueller investigation for anti - trump text message -PRON- exchange with a top fbi lawyer who have also work for the mueller probe . now , with news of ohr 's contact with steele and simpson , republicans on capitol hill -- and perhaps some democrats , too -- will wonder just how far the obama justice department official go in the effort to stop trump .

article5.txt sentence_sentiment_distribution: 
neutralpositivenegativevery positive

article5.txt quote_extractor: 


article5.txt stop_word_filter: 
It's 10 months since Washington learned former British spy Christopher Steele, author so-called ``Trump dossier, ''took Hillary Clinton-funded opposition research document FBI, considered sponsoring anti-Trump work height 2016 presidential campaign. Now, congressional investigators made perhaps even consequential discovery: Knowledge dossier project, campaign, extended highest levels Obama Justice Department. The department's Bruce Ohr, career official, served associate deputy attorney general time campaign. That placed deputy attorney general, Sally Yates, ran day-to-day operations department. In 2016, Ohr's office steps away Yates, later fired defying President Trump's initial travel ban executive order still later became prominent anti-Trump voice upon leaving Justice Department. Unbeknownst investigators recently, Ohr knew Steele repeated contacts Steele Steele working dossier. Ohr also met election Glenn Simpson, head Fusion GPS, opposition research company paid Clinton campaign compile dossier. Word Ohr met Steele Simpson, first reported Fox News' James Rosen Jake Gibson, news current officials Justice Department. Shortly learning, demoted Ohr, taking away associate deputy attorney general title moving full time another position running department's organized crime drug enforcement task forces. The news also stunned investigating matter. Yes, knew knowledge dossier extended officials FBI. That bad enough; could FBI endorse consider underwriting one campaign's dirt-digging operation middle hotly contested election? But investigators know nearly highest levels Obama Justice Department also aware dossier. Related: Why FBI director walked tightrope Steele dossier Investigators believe dossier's sensational allegations collusion Russia Trump campaign played role beginning FBI's counterintelligence investigation Trump-Russia affair — investigation later morphed special counsel Robert Mueller's probe. House Intelligence Committee Chairman Devin Nunes, R-Calif., whose investigation led number revelations dossier, unhappy learn key piece information months investigation began. Ohr's contacts Steele Simpson covered subpoena Nunes issued FBI Justice Department Aug. 24. Yet recently Tuesday, Nunes, along House Oversight Committee Chairman Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., met deputy attorney general Rod Rosenstein, department said nothing Ohr's role.`` Pursuant House Intelligence Committee's prior subpoenas information requests, Department Justice provided committee information contacts DOJ official Bruce Ohr Fusion GPS representatives Christopher Steele,'' Nunes said statement Thursday. ``The committee issue subpoena Bruce Ohr information matter. ''The Ohr revelation comes long word top FBI agent Peter Strzok removed Mueller investigation anti-Trump text messages exchanged top FBI lawyer also worked Mueller probe. Now, news Ohr's contacts Steele Simpson, Republicans Capitol Hill — perhaps Democrats, — wonder far Obama Justice Department officials went effort stop Trump.

article5.txt calculate_stopword_frequency: 
arabicazerbaijanidanishdutchenglishfinnishfrenchgermangreekhungarianitaliankazakhnepalinorwegianportugueseromanianrussianspanishswedishturkish

============================================================

article6.txt stemmerize: 
washington — al franken walk onto the senat floor just befor noon thursday and anxious scan the spectat galleri abov to find his family. he want to make sure they were there in what was go to be the most difficult moment in a short but — until recent day — wild success polit career.mr. franken, a “saturday night live” comedian turn progress democrat hero who was be mention serious as a presidenti candidate, was about to relinquish a minnesota senat seat he had bare won in the first place in the face of mount accus that he fondl and act inappropri in the past with sever women.it was an almost unthink loss for mr. franken, who continu to insist he hadn't realli done anyth wrong. but if it was a person sacrifice, it was one that could help his parti in the month ahead by allow democrat to draw a sharp distinct between their parti and it effort to hold politician account for sexual harass and abus and republicans, who could be welcom a man accus of sexual assault teenag girl into the senat as earli as next week.feel among democrat who demand mr. franken resign after anoth accus came forward on wednesday were raw as they watch a much-admir colleagu step aside, and they weren't eager to discuss the polit ramifications. but privately, they said the purg of mr. franken — and that of repres john conyer jr., the michigan democrat and dean of the house, this week — would stand in strong contrast with republican and leav their parti “unassailable” on the issue.republican were never fan of mr. franken, and they avoid the proceed in droves. they figur it was a democrat famili matter and assum that mr. franken would no doubt point out similar accus against both presid trump and roy s. moore, the republican candid for senat in alabama who is accus of prey on teenag girl while in his 30s. but the lone republican who sat on the senat floor to listen to mr. franken, senat jeff flake of arizona, acknowledg that the resign would make mr. moor arriv in the senat that much harder to take, should he win on tuesday.“it just add anoth level of difficulty,” he said.it was a funer moment in the senat as tear were shed on the floor, in the spectat galleri and among the franken aid seat somber on a bench against the back wall on the democrat side of the chamber. mr. franken himself remain compos and was at time defiant, say that he was confid that he would be exoner by an ethic investig but that he had lost his effect as a senator.“ther is a big part of me that will alway regret have to walk away from this job with so much work to be done,” mr. franken said.th two top senat democrat — chuck schumer of new york and richard j. durbin of illinoi — turn in their seat to listen to their junior colleagu who had meant so much to the parti upon his arriv in juli 2009 after a contest recount of an elect that he note thursday he won by a whop 312 votes. (his re-elect in 2014 was much more convincing.)not onli was mr. franken a celebr with appeal to younger voter and a new face for the parti at the start of barack obama presidency, but he also becam the crucial 60th democrat vote, give the parti a supermajor abl to overcom republican filibust to enact the afford care act and other element of the first-term agenda of the obama administration.aft he finish his remarks, colleagu gather around him to offer an embrace, a handshak and word of comfort. just hour before, most had call for him to step down, make his effort to remain in the senat untenable.but mr. franken tone was also found wanting: some femal democrat senat suggest that they were surpris and dishearten that he did not take more respons for his acts.“i am extrem disappoint in senat franken,” senat catherin cortez masto, a freshman democrat from nevada who was not on the floor dure mr. franken remarks, said in a statement afterward. “the experi share by the brave women who have come forward show a disturb pattern of behavior.”mr. franken resign becam inevit in recent days. democrat women were increas uncomfort with his continu in office, say it put them in a difficult posit by have to constant explain whi he was allow to serv while they critic mr. moore. and the sudden resign under pressur of mr. conyers, one of the founder of the congression black caucus, open democrat to a charg of a doubl standard if they countenanc mr. franken remain in the senate.multipl offici said senat democrat were lean toward press for mr. franken to step down even befor a new accus aros wednesday, explain whi a half-dozen women were readi to rapid issu statement call for his resign at a pace that seem coordin but was not, accord to aides.mr. franken said he would formal resign in the “come weeks” — a timet that allow a smoother transit and keep the minnesota seat occupi by a democrat with some major year-end issu pile up in the senate.but he will soon be going, one of the first in what is begin to seem like a potenti parad off capitol hill by lawmak whose past behavior is catch up with them dure a galvan period when it come to sexual behavior. later thursday, repres trent franks, republican of arizona, said he would resign after the hous ethic committe began investig complaint that he had ask two femal staff member to be a surrog to bear his child.lawmak say they hope the case of mr. franken, mr. conyer and other lead to a new way of polic sexual harass and new legisl about the proper disposit of such episod on capitol hill. if that occurs, mr. franken will have had a real impact dure his time in the senate, just not the impact he could have ever imagin when he arriv with such fanfar more than eight year ago.

article6.txt lemmatize: 
washington -- al franken walk onto the senate floor just before noon thursday and anxiously scan the spectator gallery above to find -PRON- family . -PRON- want to make sure -PRON- be there in what be go to be the most difficult moment in a short but -- until recent day -- wildly successful political career . mr . franken , a " saturday night live " comedian turn progressive democratic hero who be be mention seriously as a presidential candidate , be about to relinquish a minnesota senate seat -PRON- have barely win in the first place in the face of mount accusation that -PRON- fondle and act inappropriately in the past with several woman . -PRON- be an almost unthinkable loss for mr. franken , who continue to insist -PRON- have not really do anything wrong . but if -PRON- be a personal sacrifice , -PRON- be one that could help -PRON- party in the month ahead by allow democrats to draw a sharp distinction between -PRON- party and -PRON- effort to hold politician accountable for sexual harassment and abuse and republicans , who could be welcome a man accuse of sexually assault teenage girl into the senate as early as next week . feeling among democrats who demand mr. franken ’s resignation after another accuser come forward on wednesday be raw as -PRON- watch a much - admired colleague step aside , and -PRON- be not eager to discuss the political ramification . but privately , -PRON- say the purge of mr. franken -- and that of representative john conyers jr. , the michigan democrat and dean of the house , this week -- would stand in strong contrast with republicans and leave -PRON- party " unassailable " on the issue . republicans be never fan of mr. franken , and -PRON- avoid the proceeding in drove . -PRON- figure -PRON- be a democratic family matter and assume that mr. franken would no doubt point out similar accusation against both president trump and roy s. moore , the republican candidate for senate in alabama who be accuse of prey on teenage girl while in -PRON- 30 . but the lone republican who sit on the senate floor to listen to mr. franken , senator jeff flake of arizona , acknowledge that the resignation would make mr. moore ’s arrival in the senate that much hard to take , should -PRON- win on tuesday.“it just add another level of difficulty , " -PRON- say . -PRON- be a funereal moment in the senate as tear be shed on the floor , in the spectator ’s gallery and among the franken aide seat somberly on a bench against the back wall on the democratic side of the chamber . mr. franken -PRON- remain composed and be at time defiant , say that -PRON- be confident that -PRON- would be exonerate by an ethic investigation but that -PRON- have lose -PRON- effectiveness as a senator.“there be a big part of -PRON- that will always regret have to walk away from this job with so much work to be do , " mr. franken say . the two top senate democrats -- chuck schumer of new york and richard j. durbin of illinois -- turn in -PRON- seat to listen to -PRON- junior colleague who have mean so much to the party upon -PRON- arrival in july 2009 after a contest recount of an election that -PRON- note thursday -PRON- win by a whopping 312 vote . ( -PRON- re - election in 2014 be much more convincing.)not only be mr. franken a celebrity with appeal to young voter and a new face for the party at the start of barack obama ’s presidency , but -PRON- also become the crucial 60th democratic vote , give the party a supermajority able to overcome republican filibuster to enact the affordable care act and other element of the first - term agenda of the obama administration . after -PRON- finish -PRON- remark , colleague gather around -PRON- to offer an embrace , a handshake and word of comfort . just hour before , most have call for -PRON- to step down , make -PRON- effort to remain in the senate untenable . but mr. franken ’s tone be also find want : some female democratic senator suggest that -PRON- be surprised and disheartened that -PRON- do not take more responsibility for -PRON- acts.“i be extremely disappointed in senator franken , " senator catherine cortez masto , a freshman democrat from nevada who be not on the floor during mr. franken ’s remark , say in a statement afterward . " the experience share by the brave woman who have come forward show a disturbing pattern of behavior.”mr . franken ’s resignation become inevitable in recent day . democratic woman be increasingly uncomfortable with -PRON- continue in office , say -PRON- put -PRON- in a difficult position by have to constantly explain why -PRON- be allow to serve while -PRON- criticize mr. moore . and the sudden resignation under pressure of mr. conyers , one of the founder of the congressional black caucus , open democrats to a charge of a double standard if -PRON- countenance mr. franken remain in the senate . multiple official say senate democrats be lean toward press for mr. franken to step down even before a new accusation arise wednesday , explain why a half - dozen woman be ready to rapidly issue statement call for -PRON- resignation at a pace that seem coordinated but be not , accord to aide . mr . franken say -PRON- would formally resign in the " come week " -- a timetable that allow a smooth transition and keep the minnesota seat occupy by a democrat with some major year - end issue pile up in the senate . but -PRON- will soon be go , one of the first in what be begin to seem like a potential parade off capitol hill by lawmaker whose past behavior be catch up with -PRON- during a galvanize period when -PRON- come to sexual behavior . later thursday , representative trent franks , republican of arizona , say -PRON- would resign after the house ethics committee begin investigate complaint that -PRON- have ask two female staff member to be a surrogate to bear -PRON- child . lawmaker say -PRON- hope the case of mr. franken , mr. conyers and other lead to a new way of police sexual harassment and new legislation about the proper disposition of such episode on capitol hill . if that occur , mr. franken will have have a real impact during -PRON- time in the senate , just not the impact -PRON- could have ever imagine when -PRON- arrive with such fanfare more than eight year ago .

article6.txt sentence_sentiment_distribution: 
neutralpositivenegativevery negativevery positive

article6.txt quote_extractor: 
Mr. Franken, a “Saturday Night Live” comedian turned progressive Democratic hero who was being mentioned seriously as a presidential candidate, was about to relinquish a Minnesota Senate seat he had barely won in the first place in the face of mounting accusations that he fondled and acted inappropriately in the past with several women.But privately, they said the purge of Mr. Franken — and that of Representative John Conyers Jr., the Michigan Democrat and dean of the House, this week — would stand in strong contrast with Republicans and leave their party “unassailable” on the issue.“It just adds another level of difficulty,” he said.“There is a big part of me that will always regret having to walk away from this job with so much work to be done,” Mr. Franken said.“I am extremely disappointed in Senator Franken,” Senator Catherine Cortez Masto, a freshman Democrat from Nevada who was not on the floor during Mr. Franken’s remarks, said in a statement afterward.“The experiences shared by the brave women who have come forward show a disturbing pattern of behavior.”

Mr. Franken’s resignation became inevitable in recent days.Mr. Franken said he would formally resign in the “coming weeks” — a timetable that allows a smoother transition and keeps the Minnesota seat occupied by a Democrat with some major year-end issues piling up in the Senate.

article6.txt stop_word_filter: 
WASHINGTON — Al Franken walked onto Senate floor noon Thursday anxiously scanned spectator galleries find family. He wanted make sure going difficult moment short — recent days — wildly successful political career. Mr. Franken, “Saturday Night Live ” comedian turned progressive Democratic hero mentioned seriously presidential candidate, relinquish Minnesota Senate seat barely first place face mounting accusations fondled acted inappropriately past several women. It almost unthinkable loss Mr. Franken, continued insist ’ really done anything wrong. But personal sacrifice, one could help party months ahead allowing Democrats draw sharp distinction party efforts hold politicians accountable sexual harassment abuse Republicans, could welcoming man accused sexually assaulting teenage girls Senate early next week. Feelings among Democrats demanded Mr. Franken ’ resignation another accuser came forward Wednesday raw watched much-admired colleague step aside, ’ eager discuss political ramifications. But privately, said purge Mr. Franken — Representative John Conyers Jr., Michigan Democrat dean House, week — would stand strong contrast Republicans leave party“ unassailable ” issue. Republicans never fans Mr. Franken, avoided proceedings droves. They figured Democratic family matter assumed Mr. Franken would doubt point similar accusations President Trump Roy S. Moore, Republican candidate Senate Alabama accused preying teenage girls 30s. But lone Republican sat Senate floor listen Mr. Franken, Senator Jeff Flake Arizona, acknowledged resignation would make Mr. Moore ’ arrival Senate much harder take, win Tuesday. “It adds another level difficulty, ” said. It funereal moment Senate tears shed floor, spectator ’ gallery among Franken aides seated somberly bench back wall Democratic side chamber. Mr. Franken remained composed times defiant, saying confident would exonerated ethics investigation lost effectiveness senator.“ There big part always regret walk away job much work done, ” Mr. Franken said. The two top Senate Democrats — Chuck Schumer New York Richard J. Durbin Illinois — turned seats listen junior colleague meant much party upon arrival July 2009 contested recount election noted Thursday whopping 312 votes. ( His re-election 2014 much convincing.) Not Mr. Franken celebrity appeal younger voters new face party start Barack Obama ’ presidency, also became crucial 60th Democratic vote, giving party supermajority able overcome Republican filibusters enact Affordable Care Act elements first-term agenda Obama administration. After finished remarks, colleagues gathered around offer embrace, handshake words comfort. Just hours, called step, making efforts remain Senate untenable. But Mr. Franken ’ tone also found wanting: Some female Democratic senators suggested surprised disheartened take responsibility acts. “I extremely disappointed Senator Franken, ” Senator Catherine Cortez Masto, freshman Democrat Nevada floor Mr. Franken ’ remarks, said statement afterward.“ The experiences shared brave women come forward show disturbing pattern behavior. ” Mr. Franken ’ resignation became inevitable recent days. Democratic women increasingly uncomfortable continuing office, saying put difficult position constantly explain allowed serve criticized Mr. Moore. And sudden resignation pressure Mr. Conyers, one founders Congressional Black Caucus, opened Democrats charge double standard countenanced Mr. Franken remaining Senate. Multiple officials said Senate Democrats leaning toward pressing Mr. Franken step even new accusation arose Wednesday, explaining half-dozen women ready rapidly issue statements calling resignation pace seemed coordinated, according aides. Mr. Franken said would formally resign “coming weeks ” — timetable allows smoother transition keeps Minnesota seat occupied Democrat major year-end issues piling Senate. But soon going, one first beginning seem like potential parade Capitol Hill lawmakers whose past behavior catching galvanizing period comes sexual behavior. Later Thursday, Representative Trent Franks, Republican Arizona, said would resign House Ethics Committee began investigating complaints asked two female staff members surrogate bear child. Lawmakers say hope cases Mr. Franken, Mr. Conyers others lead new way policing sexual harassment new legislation proper disposition episodes Capitol Hill. If occurs, Mr. Franken real impact time Senate, impact could ever imagined arrived fanfare eight years ago.

article6.txt calculate_stopword_frequency: 
arabicazerbaijanidanishdutchenglishfinnishfrenchgermangreekhungarianitaliankazakhnepalinorwegianportugueseromanianrussianspanishswedishturkish

============================================================

article7.txt stemmerize: 
　　中新网北京12月11日电(记者 张尼)南京大屠杀80周年之际，中国民间对日索赔联合会致函日本驻中国大使馆，要求日本政府对南京大屠杀进行谢罪，并对南京大屠杀的中国受害者进行赔偿。点击进入下一页资料图：2017年4月4日，侵华日军南京大屠杀遇难同胞纪念馆举行清明家祭。 泱波 摄　　“日本无条件投降至今已经72年了，日本政府本应从二战的历史中总结教训，但我们看到的却恰恰相反，日本政府不断寻找各种借口对当年的罪行百般抵赖，并企图通过修宪来复活日本军国主义，且从未就南京大屠杀做出谢罪和反省。”在给日本驻华大使横井裕的信函中，中国民间对日索赔联合会会长童增写道。　　信函中，中国民间对日索赔联合会要求日本政府就南京大屠杀谢罪，并对受害者进行赔偿。　　记者了解到，这是该联合会第三次就南京大屠杀谢罪问题致函日本政府，目前日本大使馆已经签收了此份要求函。　　被称为“中国民间对日索赔第一人”的童增从上个世纪90年代起发起民间对日索赔运动，从那时起至今，他共收到万余封日本侵华战争受害者或家属来信，控诉战争给他们带来的苦难。　　“我们的要求完全符合国际法原则和战后国际惯例。”童增日前接受中新网记者采访时说，国际上对于制造战争罪行的国家主体的惩罚，制定了必须谢罪赔偿的一系列国际法律文件。战后德国对纳粹暴行的反思和谢罪、以及对受害国的受害者进行赔偿形成了国际惯例。　　“我们要求日本政府对南京大屠杀谢罪赔偿，是要让日本政府正视侵略历史，从长远来看，有利于中日友好的发展。”童增说。(完)

article7.txt lemmatize: 
　　 中新网北京12月11日电(记者 张尼)南京大屠杀80周年之际，中国民间对日索赔联合会致函日本驻中国大使馆，要求日本政府对南京大屠杀进行谢罪，并对南京大屠杀的中国受害者进行赔偿。点击进入下一页资料图：2017年4月4日，侵华日军南京大屠杀遇难同胞纪念馆举行清明家祭 。 泱波 摄 　　 " 日本无条件投降至今已经72年了，日本政府本应从二战的历史中总结教训，但我们看到的却恰恰相反，日本政府不断寻找各种借口对当年的罪行百般抵赖，并企图通过修宪来复活日本军国主义，且从未就南京大屠杀做出谢罪和反省。”在给日本驻华大使横井裕的信函中，中国民间对日索赔联合会会长童增写道 。 　　 信函中，中国民间对日索赔联合会要求日本政府就南京大屠杀谢罪，并对受害者进行赔偿 。 　　 记者了解到，这是该联合会第三次就南京大屠杀谢罪问题致函日本政府，目前日本大使馆已经签收了此份要求函 。 　　 被称为“中国民间对日索赔第一人”的童增从上个世纪90年代起发起民间对日索赔运动，从那时起至今，他共收到万余封日本侵华战争受害者或家属来信，控诉战争给他们带来的苦难 。 　　 " 我们的要求完全符合国际法原则和战后国际惯例。”童增日前接受中新网记者采访时说，国际上对于制造战争罪行的国家主体的惩罚，制定了必须谢罪赔偿的一系列国际法律文件。战后德国对纳粹暴行的反思和谢罪、以及对受害国的受害者进行赔偿形成了国际惯例 。 　　 " 我们要求日本政府对南京大屠杀谢罪赔偿，是要让日本政府正视侵略历史，从长远来看，有利于中日友好的发展。”童增说。(完 )

article7.txt sentence_sentiment_distribution: 
neutral

article7.txt quote_extractor: 
　　中新网北京12月11日电(记者 张尼)南京大屠杀80周年之际，中国民间对日索赔联合会致函日本驻中国大使馆，要求日本政府对南京大屠杀进行谢罪，并对南京大屠杀的中国受害者进行赔偿。

点击进入下一页
资料图：2017年4月4日，侵华日军南京大屠杀遇难同胞纪念馆举行清明家祭。 泱波 摄
　　“日本无条件投降至今已经72年了，日本政府本应从二战的历史中总结教训，但我们看到的却恰恰相反，日本政府不断寻找各种借口对当年的罪行百般抵赖，并企图通过修宪来复活日本军国主义，且从未就南京大屠杀做出谢罪和反省。”在给日本驻华大使横井裕的信函中，中国民间对日索赔联合会会长童增写道。

　　信函中，中国民间对日索赔联合会要求日本政府就南京大屠杀谢罪，并对受害者进行赔偿。

　　记者了解到，这是该联合会第三次就南京大屠杀谢罪问题致函日本政府，目前日本大使馆已经签收了此份要求函。

　　被称为“中国民间对日索赔第一人”的童增从上个世纪90年代起发起民间对日索赔运动，从那时起至今，他共收到万余封日本侵华战争受害者或家属来信，控诉战争给他们带来的苦难。

　　“我们的要求完全符合国际法原则和战后国际惯例。”童增日前接受中新网记者采访时说，国际上对于制造战争罪行的国家主体的惩罚，制定了必须谢罪赔偿的一系列国际法律文件。战后德国对纳粹暴行的反思和谢罪、以及对受害国的受害者进行赔偿形成了国际惯例。

　　“我们要求日本政府对南京大屠杀谢罪赔偿，是要让日本政府正视侵略历史，从长远来看，有利于中日友好的发展。”童增说。(完)

article7.txt stop_word_filter: 
中新网北京12月11日电 (记者张尼)南京大屠杀80周年之际，中国民间对日索赔联合会致函日本驻中国大使馆，要求日本政府对南京大屠杀进行谢罪，并对南京大屠杀的中国受害者进行赔偿。点击进入下一页资料图：2017年4月4日，侵华日军南京大屠杀遇难同胞纪念馆举行清明家祭。泱波摄 “日本无条件投降至今已经72年了，日本政府本应从二战的历史中总结教训，但我们看到的却恰恰相反，日本政府不断寻找各种借口对当年的罪行百般抵赖，并企图通过修宪来复活日本军国主义，且从未就南京大屠杀做出谢罪和反省。 ”在给日本驻华大使横井裕的信函中，中国民间对日索赔联合会会长童增写道。信函中，中国民间对日索赔联合会要求日本政府就南京大屠杀谢罪，并对受害者进行赔偿。记者了解到，这是该联合会第三次就南京大屠杀谢罪问题致函日本政府，目前日本大使馆已经签收了此份要求函。被称为“中国民间对日索赔第一人 ”的童增从上个世纪90年代起发起民间对日索赔运动，从那时起至今，他共收到万余封日本侵华战争受害者或家属来信，控诉战争给他们带来的苦难。 “我们的要求完全符合国际法原则和战后国际惯例。 ”童增日前接受中新网记者采访时说，国际上对于制造战争罪行的国家主体的惩罚，制定了必须谢罪赔偿的一系列国际法律文件。战后德国对纳粹暴行的反思和谢罪、以及对受害国的受害者进行赔偿形成了国际惯例。“我们要求日本政府对南京大屠杀谢罪赔偿，是要让日本政府正视侵略历史，从长远来看，有利于中日友好的发展。 ”童增说。 (完)

article7.txt calculate_stopword_frequency: 
arabicazerbaijanidanishdutchenglishfinnishfrenchgermangreekhungarianitaliankazakhnepalinorwegianportugueseromanianrussianspanishswedishturkish

============================================================

article8.txt stemmerize: 
der weg zu einer neuen großen koalit wird wohl lang und schwierig.nun hat cdu-präsidiumsmitg jen spahn erneut ein minderheitsregierung in gespräch gebracht. „wenn es mit der spd gar nicht geht, machen wir es eben alleine“, sagt spahn im interview mit bild am sonntag.da interview mit jen spahnjen spahnjen spahndies interview wird die spd „bätschi“ findenjen spahn ist der senkrechtstart der cdu. mit 22 zog er in den bundestag ein. heut macht er sich einen namen al merkel-gegenspieler.► damit signalisiert cdu-mann spahn sehr deutlich, dass es durchaus alternativen zu einer neuauflag der großen koalit mit der spd gibt – und die union den sozialdemokraten bei den sondierungen nicht so weit entgegen kommen muss, wie dies es gern darstellen.di sozialdemokraten hatten nach langem ringen am donnerstag auf ihrem parteitag für gespräch mit der union gestimmt.spd-chef martin schulz betont aber immer wieder, dass es keinen „automatismus zu einer neuen großen koalition“ gebe und auch, dass die gespräch „ergebnisoffen“ geführt werden.führend spd-politik brachten  – wie spahn – ein minderheitsregierung oder auch neuwahlen in gespräch.kein groko um jeden preiscdu-politik jen spahn sagt dazu: „neuwahlen wären das schlechteste.“ sie würden kein völlig ander ergebni al die wahl im septemb bringen. „wir können nicht vor die bürger treten und sagen ‚eur wahl passt un nicht, wählt noch mal.'“► ein minderheitsregierung hingegen sei zwar etwa „völlig neues“, müsse aber deshalb nicht schlecht sein, sagt das cdu-präsidiumsmitglied. „angela merkel könnte mit all ihrer erfahrung auch ein minderheitsregierung erfolgreich führen.“ein große koalit um jeden prei lehn er ab. „wenn ein neue große koalit die falschen schwerpunkt setzen würde, hätten union und spd in vier jahren zusammen nicht mal mehr ein mehrheit“, sagt spahn. „es waren schon jetzt nur noch 53 prozent.“ verbindend projekt für ein neue koalit mit der spd schlug spahn den „starken staat“ vor. „recht, ordnung und sicherheit müssen wieder garantiert werden.“ die müsste die spd eigentlich genauso sehen: „sicherheit ist ja auch ein sozial frage.“ein neue große koalit könne nur gelingen, „wenn wir un der unzufriedenheit bei den themen inner sicherheit, migrat und integr stellen“, sagt spahn. auch viel spd-wähler würden nicht wollen, dass sich die migrationskris 2015 wiederholt. dafür brauch es konkret maßnahmen wie etwa den schutz der eu-außengrenzen, schneller asylverfahren, konsequent abschiebungen und „auch das signal, dass es für subsidiär geschützt keinen nachzug der familien nach deutschland gibt“.auch interessantlexwar elektronisch fahrtenbuchjetzt aktionsprei sichern und maxim steuern sparen!tschüss 1%-method – schnell & sicher umsteigen und durchschnittlich 2.758 euro sparen. rabatt nur bis 31. dezember!fotokastendein geschenkefinderdi besten geschenkideen für ganz besonder menschen in deinem leben mit fotokastenmehr zur spdmerkel, bellevuegroko-pokerwenn klappt, wird teuer für die kanzlerinwaren das die ersten schritt richtung große koalition? wie teuer wird die neuauflag der groko für die kanzlerin?spd-bundesvorstand entscheidet am freitag über sondierungen mit der unionnach groko-gesprächspd will freitag über sondierungen entscheidennach dem treffen am mittwoch mit der union will der spd-bundesvorstand am freitag entscheiden, ob die spd in sondierungen eintritt.d fahrplan der parteien► am sonntagabend berät der cdu-bundesvorstand über das vorgehen.► am montag trifft sich zunächst das präsidium der cdu und danach der vorstand in einer weiteren runde.► am mittwoch kommen spd und union zu ersten offiziellen gesprächen über ein neuauflag der groko zusammen.► am freitag will die spd entscheiden, ob sie mit der union in sondierungsgespräch eintritt oder nicht.so geht die spd in die verhandlungenam mittwoch werden sich die partei- und fraktionschef von cdu, csu und spd erstmal zusammensetzen, um über möglich koalitionsgespräch zu sprechen. „man geht nicht in verhandlungen mit einem riesigen rucksack von roten linien“, warnt spd-fraktionschefin andrea nahl am freitag im deutschlandfunk.dennoch liegt vor möglichen koalitionsverhandlungen bereit ein reih harter forderungen und drohungen beider seiten auf dem tisch. die list an themen, auf die die ein oder ander seit unbedingt bestehen oder die sie unbedingt verhindern wollen, wird immer länger. im kern sind das forderungen zur steuerpolitik, die bürgerversicherung und das thema migration.► bei der steuerpolitik fordert die spd ein erhöhung der steuerlast für hohe einkommen im gegenzug zur entlastung kleiner und mittler einkommen.► die spd will die parität bei den beiträgen zur gesetzlichen krankenversicherung, also gleich lasten für arbeitnehm und arbeitgeber, wiederherstellen und dazu die allein von den beschäftigten zu tragenden zusatzbeiträg abschaffen. am liebsten würde sie die im rahmen einer bürgerversicherung umsetzen, die zahlreich sozialdemokraten al ein entscheidend voraussetzung für ein große koalit genannt haben.►bei der migrat ist der sensibelst punkt das thema familiennachzug für flüchtling mit eingeschränktem schutzstatus.di begrenzung der zuwanderung, ein weiter aussetzung des familiennachzug und konsequent abschiebungen hat der künftige bayerisch ministerpräsid söder al grundbedingungen genannt, die die spd akzeptieren müsse. die spd wiederum will aber die aussetzung des familiennachzug über märz 2018 hinaus nicht verlängern. zudem spricht sie sich klar gegen ein obergrenz für die aufnahm von flüchtlingen aus.► besond für die csu sind die roten linien der spd eher ein rote tuch.der designiert bayerisch ministerpräsid markus söder (csu) wie noch vor den ersten gesprächen kernforderungen der spd klar zurück.„di bürgerversicherung bringt nichts“, sagt söder der „welt am sonntag“. und die vereinigten staaten von europa, so wie martin schulz sie definiert, seien „nicht das, was die mehrheit der deutschen will“, sagt söder unter bezug auf die europa-vis des spd-chefs.in den anstehenden gesprächen mit der spd sind fragen um „zuwanderung und familiennachzug“ für söder wichtiger. hier sei das ergebni der gescheiterten sondierungsgespräch über ein jamaika-bündni mit cdu, fdp und grünen aus seiner sicht „ein gute basi für die kommenden verhandlungen“.nutzen all verhandlungen nichts, kommen dann nur noch zwei szenarien in frage: neuwahlen oder ein minderheitsregierung.aktuell umfragenbundeskanzlerin angela merkel (m, cdu) mit dem spd-chef martin schulz (r) und csu-chef horst seehoferbild-wahlcheckd verlier der woch ist ...die spd-spitz ändert ihr meinung in sachen groko, die csu beendet ihr intern machtgerangel. dies partei wird dafür abgestraft.mit der zustimmung der spd zu groko-gesprächen stiegt auch die zustimmung in der bevölkerungneu umfragezahlengroko-zustimmung steigt deutlichdi zeichen stehen immer mehr auf groko. und die wähler scheinen das gar nicht mehr so schlecht zu finden.wa bedeutet ein minderheitsregierung?minderheitsregierungen verfügen über kein eigen mehrheit. sie müssen sich deshalb im parlament immer wieder neue mehrheiten suchen – und entsprechend auch politisch gegner überzeugen. ist ein modell, dass vor allem in skandinavischen ländern der normalfal ist, in deutschland aber auf bundeseben noch nie zum einsatz kam.wi könnte ein minderheitsregierung in deutschland realistisch aussehen?► wenn sich die union al stärkste fraktion im parlament entscheidet, ein minderheitsregierung zu bilden, könnten sie sich der rückendeckung der spd versichern (tolerierungsmodell).di sozialdemokraten müssten sich bereit erklären, die regierung dauerhaft zu tolerieren. ein art „groko light“.und union und spd müssten bundespräsid frank-walter-steinmei (61) für das model begeistern. denn der wirbt bisher eher für ein fortsetzung der großen koalit …bild ombudsmann ernst elitzwi würden neuwahlen ablaufen?bish ist die alt bundesregierung weiterhin geschäftsführend im amt. das bleibt so lang so, bis der bundespräsid einen kandidaten zur kanzlerwahl vorschlägt. das wird er aber erst tun, wenn es entwed ein klare regierungsbildung oder einen plan für ein minderheitsregierung gibt.so funktioniert ein minderheitsregierung — infografik info.bild jamaika ausist klar, dass neu gewählt werden muss, kann das nicht einfach so beschlossen werden, sondern ist auch an die kanzlerwahl geknüpft.neuwahlen sind erst möglich, wenn ein neuer regierungschef mit nur einer relativ mehrheit gewählt wird. dann kann der bundespräsid den bundestag auflösen. innerhalb von 60 tagen muss es dann neuwahlen geben.da wollen aber die parteien eher nicht, denn laut den aktuellen umfragen ist wenig bewegung in den ergebnissen der parteien und somit wäre die situat nach der wahl nicht viel ander al zur zeit.und neuwahlen wären auch ziemlich teuer: die vergangen bundestagswahl war mit 92 millionen euro kosten die teuerst aller zeiten – billig wäre die nächste wahl wahrscheinlich nicht.

article8.txt lemmatize: 
der weg zu einer neuen großen koalition wird wohl lang und schwierig . nun hat cdu - präsidiumsmitglied jens spahn erneut eine minderheitsregierung in gespräch gebracht . „ wenn es mit der spd gar nicht geht , machen wir es eben alleine " , sagte spahn -PRON- be interview mit bild be sonntag.das interview mit jens spahnjen spahnjens spahndies interview wird die spd „ bätschi " findenjen spahn ist der senkrechtstarter der cdu . mit 22 zog er in den bundestag ein . heute macht er sich einen namen al merkel - gegenspieler . ► damit signalisiert cdu - mann spahn sehr deutlich , dass es durchaus alternativen zu einer neuauflage der großen koalition mit der spd gibt – und die union den sozialdemokraten bei den sondierungen nicht so weit entgegen komman muss , wie diese es gerne darstellen . die sozialdemokraten hatten nach langem ringen be donnerstag auf ihrem parteitag für gespräche mit der union gestimmt . spd - chef martin schulz betonte aber immer wieder , dass es keinen „ automatismus zu einer neuen großen koalition " gebe und auch , dass die gespräche „ ergebnisoffen " geführt werden . führende spd - politiker brachten   – wie spahn – eine minderheitsregierung oder auch neuwahlen in gespräch . keine groko um jeden preiscdu - politiker jens spahn sagte dazu : „ neuwahlen wären das schlechteste . " sie würden kein völlig andere ergebnis al die wahl -PRON- be september bringen . „ wir können nicht vor die bürger treten und sagen ‚ eure wahl passt un nicht , wählt noch mal . ' " ► eine minderheitsregierung hingegen sei zwar etwa „ völlig neue " , müsse aber deshalb nicht schlechtes sein , sagte da cdu - präsidiumsmitglied . „ angela merkel könnte mit all ihrer erfahrung auch eine minderheitsregierung erfolgreich führen.“eine große koalition um jeden preis lehne er ab . „ wenn eine neue große koalition die falschen schwerpunkte setzen würde , hätten union und spd in vi jahren zusamman nicht mal mehr eine mehrheit " , sagte spahn . „ es waren schon jetzt nur noch 53 prozent.“als verbindend projekt für eine neue koalition mit der spd schlug spahn den „ starken staat " vor . „ recht , ordnung und sicherheit müssen wieder garantiert werden . " die müsste die spd eigentlich genauso sehen : „ sicherheit ist ja auch eine soziale frage.“eine neue große koalition könne nur gelingen , „ wenn wir un der unzufriedenheit bei den themen innere sicherheit , migration und integration stellen " , sagte spahn . auch viele spd - wähler würden nicht wollen , dass sich die migrationskrise 2015 wiederholt . dafür brauche es konkrete maßnahmen wie etwa den schutz der eu - außengrenzen , schnellere asylverfahren , konsequente abschiebungen und „ auch das signal , dass es für subsidiär geschützte keinen nachzug der familien nach deutschland gibt“.auch interessantlexware elektronisches fahrtenbuchjetzt aktionspreis sichern und maximal steuern sparen!tschüss 1%-methode – schnell & sicher umsteigen und durchschnittlich 2.758 euro sparen . rabatt nur bis 31 . dezember!fotokastendein geschenkefinderdie besten geschenkideen für ganz besondere menschen in deinem leben mit fotokastenmehr zur spdmerkel , bellevuegroko - pokerwenn ’s klappt , wird ’s teuer für die kanzlerinwaren das die ersten schritte richtung große koalition ? wie teuer wird die neuauflage der groko für die kanzlerin?spd - bundesvorstand entscheidet be freitag über sondierungen mit der unionnach groko - gesprächspd will freitag über sondierungen entscheidennach dem treffen be mittwoch mit der union will der spd - bundesvorstand be freitag entscheiden , ob die spd in sondierungen eintritt . der fahrplan der parteien ► be sonntagabend berät der cdu - bundesvorstand über das vorgehen . ► be montag trifft sich zunächst das präsidium der cdu und danach der vorstand in einer weiteren runde . ► be mittwoch komman spd und union zu ersten offiziellen gesprächen über eine neuauflage der groko zusamman . ► be freitag will die spd entscheiden , ob sie mit der union in sondierungsgespräche eintritt oder nicht . so geht die spd in die verhandlungenam mittwoch werden sich die partei- und fraktionschefs von cdu , csu und spd erstmal zusammensetzen , um über mögliche koalitionsgespräche zu sprechen . „ man geht nicht in verhandlungen mit einem riesigen rucksack von roten linien " , warnte spd - fraktionschefin andrea nahles be freitag -PRON- be deutschlandfunk . dennoch liegt vor möglichen koalitionsverhandlungen bereit eine reihe harter forderungen und drohungen beider seiten auf dem tisch . die liste an themen , auf die die eine oder andere seite unbedingt bestehen oder die sie unbedingt verhindern wollen , wird immer länger . -PRON- be kern sind das forderungen zur steuerpolitik , die bürgerversicherung und das thema migration . ► bei der steuerpolitik fordert die spd eine erhöhung der steuerlast für hohe einkommen -PRON- be gegenzug zur entlastung kleiner und mittlerer einkommen . ► die spd will die parität bei den beiträgen zur gesetzlichen krankenversicherung , also gleiche lasten für arbeitnehmer und arbeitgeber , wiederherstellen und dazu die allein von den beschäftigten zu tragenden zusatzbeiträge abschaffen . be liebsten würde sie die -PRON- be rahmen einer bürgerversicherung umsetzen , die zahlreiche sozialdemokraten al eine entscheidende voraussetzung für eine große koalition genannt haben. ► bei der migration ist der sensibelste punkt das thema familiennachzug für flüchtlinge mit eingeschränktem schutzstatus . die begrenzung der zuwanderung , eine weitere aussetzung des familiennachzugs und konsequente abschiebungen hat der künftige bayerischer ministerpräsident söder al grundbedingungen genannt , die die spd akzeptieren müsse . die spd wiederum will aber die aussetzung des familiennachzugs über märz 2018 hinaus nicht verlängern . zudem spricht sie sich klar gegen eine obergrenze für die aufnahme von flüchtlingen aus . ► besonder für die csu sind die roten linien der spd eher ein rot tuch . der designierte bayerische ministerpräsident markus söder ( csu ) wy noch vor den ersten gesprächen kernforderungen der spd klar zurück.„die bürgerversicherung bringt nicht " , sagte söder der „ welt be sonntag " . und die vereinigten staaten von europa , so wie martin schulz sie definiert , seien „ nicht das , be die mehrheit der deutschen will “ , sagte söder unter bezug auf die europa - vision des spd - chefs . in den anstehenden gesprächen mit der spd sind fragen um „ zuwanderung und familiennachzug " für söder wichtiger . hier sei das ergebnis der gescheiterten sondierungsgespräche über ein jamaika - bündnis mit cdu , fdp und grünen aus seiner sicht „ eine gute basis für die kommenden verhandlungen“.nutzen alle verhandlungen nicht , komman dann nur noch zwei szenarien in frage : neuwahlen oder eine minderheitsregierung . aktuelle umfragenbundeskanzlerin angela merkel ( m , cdu ) mit dem spd - chef martin schulz ( r ) und csu - chef horst seehoferbild - wahlcheckder verlierer der woche ist ... die spd - spitze ändert ihre meinung in sachen groko , die csu beendet ihr intern machtgerangel . diese partei wird dafür abgestraft . mit der zustimmung der spd zu groko - gesprächen stiegt auch die zustimmung in der bevölkerungneue umfragezahlengroko - zustimmung steigt deutlichdie zeichen stehen immer mehr auf groko . und die wähler scheinen das gar nicht mehr so schlecht zu finden . be bedeutet eine minderheitsregierung?minderheitsregierungen verfügen über keine eigene mehrheit . sie müssen sich deshalb -PRON- be parlament immer wieder neue mehrheiten suchen – und entsprechend auch politische gegner überzeugen . es ist ein modell , dass vor allem in skandinavischen ländern der normalfall ist , in deutschland aber auf bundesebene noch nie zum einsatz kam . wie könnte eine minderheitsregierung in deutschland realistisch aussehen ? ► wenn sich die union al stärkste fraktion -PRON- be parlament entscheidet , eine minderheitsregierung zu bilden , könnten sie sich der rückendeckung der spd versichern ( tolerierungsmodell).die sozialdemokraten müssten sich bereit erklären , die regierung dauerhaft zu tolerieren . eine art „ groko light“.und union und spd müssten bundespräsident frank - walter - steinmeier ( 61 ) für das modell begeistern . denn der wirbt bisher eher für eine fortsetzung der großen koalition … bild ombudsmann ernst elitzwie würden neuwahlen ablaufen?bisher ist die alte bundesregierung weiterhin geschäftsführend -PRON- be amt . das bleibt so lange so , bis der bundespräsident einen kandidaten zur kanzlerwahl vorschlägt . das wird er aber erst tun , wenn es entweder eine klare regierungsbildung oder einen plan für eine minderheitsregierung gibt . so funktioniert eine minderheitsregierung -- infografik info . bild jamaika ausist klar , dass neu gewählt werden muss , kann das nicht einfach so beschlossen werden , sondern ist auch an die kanzlerwahl geknüpft . neuwahlen sind erst möglich , wenn ein neuer regierungschef mit nur einer relativer mehrheit gewählt wird . dann kann der bundespräsident den bundestag auflösen . innerhalb von 60 tagen muss es dann neuwahlen geben . das wollen aber die parteien eher nicht , denn laut den aktuellen umfragen ist wenig bewegung in den ergebnissen der parteien und somit wäre die situation nach der wahl nicht viel ander al zur zeit . und neuwahlen wären auch ziemlich teuer : die vergangene bundestagswahl war mit 92 millionen euro kosten die teuerste aller zeiten – billiger wäre die nächste wahl wahrscheinlich nicht .

article8.txt sentence_sentiment_distribution: 
neutralnegativevery negative

article8.txt quote_extractor: 
„Wenn es mit der SPD gar nicht geht, machen wir es eben alleine“, sagte Spahn im Interview mit BILD am SONNTAG.DAS INTERVIEW MIT JENS SPAHN
Jens Spahn
JENS SPAHN
Dieses Interview wird die SPD „Bätschi“ finden
Jens Spahn ist der Senkrechtstarter der CDU.SPD-Chef Martin Schulz betonte aber immer wieder, dass es keinen „Automatismus zu einer neuen Großen Koalition“ gebe und auch, dass die Gespräche „ergebnisoffen“ geführt werden.Keine GroKo um jeden Preis

CDU-Politiker Jens Spahn sagte dazu: „Neuwahlen wären das Schlechteste.“ Sie würden kein völlig anderes Ergebnis als die Wahl im September bringen.„Wir können nicht vor die Bürger treten und sagen ‚Eure Wahl passt uns nicht, wählt noch mal.‘“
► Eine Minderheitsregierung hingegen sei zwar etwas „völlig Neues“, müsse aber deshalb nichts Schlechtes sein, sagte das CDU-Präsidiumsmitglied.„Angela Merkel könnte mit all ihrer Erfahrung auch eine Minderheitsregierung erfolgreich führen.“
Eine große Koalition um jeden Preis lehne er ab.„Wenn eine neue Große Koalition die falschen Schwerpunkte setzen würde, hätten Union und SPD in vier Jahren zusammen nicht mal mehr eine Mehrheit“, sagte Spahn.„Es waren schon jetzt nur noch 53 Prozent.“
Als verbindendes Projekt für eine neue Koalition mit der SPD schlug Spahn den „starken Staat“ vor.„Recht, Ordnung und Sicherheit müssen wieder garantiert werden.“ Dies müsste die SPD eigentlich genauso sehen: „Sicherheit ist ja auch eine soziale Frage.“
Eine neue große Koalition könne nur gelingen, „wenn wir uns der Unzufriedenheit bei den Themen Innere Sicherheit, Migration und Integration stellen“, sagte Spahn.Dafür brauche es konkrete Maßnahmen wie etwa den Schutz der EU-Außengrenzen, schnellere Asylverfahren, konsequente Abschiebungen und „auch das Signal, dass es für subsidiär Geschützte keinen Nachzug der Familien nach Deutschland gibt“.„Man geht nicht in Verhandlungen mit einem riesigen Rucksack von roten Linien“, warnte SPD-Fraktionschefin Andrea Nahles am Freitag im Deutschlandfunk.„Die Bürgerversicherung bringt nichts“, sagte Söder der „Welt am Sonntag“.Und die Vereinigten Staaten von Europa, so wie Martin Schulz sie definiert, seien „nicht das, was die Mehrheit der Deutschen will“, sagte Söder unter Bezug auf die Europa-Vision des SPD-Chefs.In den anstehenden Gesprächen mit der SPD sind Fragen um „Zuwanderung und Familiennachzug“ für Söder wichtiger.Hier sei das Ergebnis der gescheiterten Sondierungsgespräche über ein Jamaika-Bündnis mit CDU, FDP und Grünen aus seiner Sicht „eine gute Basis für die kommenden Verhandlungen“.Eine Art „GroKo light“.

article8.txt stop_word_filter: 
Der Weg zu einer neuen Großen Koalition wird wohl lang und schwierig. Nun hat CDU-Präsidiumsmitglied Jens Spahn erneut eine Minderheitsregierung ins Gespräch gebracht. „Wenn es mit der SPD gar nicht geht, machen wir es eben alleine “, sagte Spahn im Interview mit BILD SONNTAG. DAS INTERVIEW MIT JENS SPAHN Jens Spahn JENS SPAHN Dieses Interview wird die SPD „Bätschi“ finden Jens Spahn ist der Senkrechtstarter der CDU. Mit 22 zog er den Bundestag ein. Heute macht er sich einen Namen als Merkel-Gegenspieler. ► Damit signalisiert CDU-Mann Spahn sehr deutlich, dass es durchaus Alternativen zu einer Neuauflage der Großen Koalition mit der SPD gibt – und die Union den Sozialdemokraten bei den Sondierungen nicht weit entgegen kommen muss, wie diese es gerne darstellen. Die Sozialdemokraten hatten nach langem Ringen Donnerstag auf ihrem Parteitag für Gespräche mit der Union gestimmt. SPD-Chef Martin Schulz betonte aber immer wieder, dass es keinen „Automatismus zu einer neuen Großen Koalition “gebe und auch, dass die Gespräche „ergebnisoffen“ geführt werden. Führende SPD-Politiker brachten – wie Spahn – eine Minderheitsregierung oder auch Neuwahlen ins Gespräch. Keine GroKo um jeden Preis CDU-Politiker Jens Spahn sagte dazu: „Neuwahlen wären das Schlechteste. “Sie würden kein völlig anderes Ergebnis als die Wahl im September bringen. „Wir können nicht vor die Bürger treten und sagen ‚Eure Wahl passt uns nicht, wählt noch mal. ‘“ ► Eine Minderheitsregierung hingegen sei zwar etwas „völlig Neues “, müsse aber deshalb nichts Schlechtes sein, sagte das CDU-Präsidiumsmitglied. „Angela Merkel könnte mit ihrer Erfahrung auch eine Minderheitsregierung erfolgreich führen.“ Eine große Koalition um jeden Preis lehne er ab. „Wenn eine neue Große Koalition die falschen Schwerpunkte setzen würde, hätten Union und SPD vier Jahren zusammen nicht mal mehr eine Mehrheit “, sagte Spahn. „Es waren schon jetzt nur noch 53 Prozent.“ Als verbindendes Projekt für eine neue Koalition mit der SPD schlug Spahn den „starken Staat “vor. „Recht, Ordnung und Sicherheit müssen wieder garantiert werden.“ Dies müsste die SPD eigentlich genauso sehen: „Sicherheit ist ja auch eine soziale Frage. “Eine neue große Koalition könne nur gelingen, „wenn wir uns der Unzufriedenheit bei den Themen Innere Sicherheit, Migration und Integration stellen“, sagte Spahn. Auch viele SPD-Wähler würden nicht wollen, dass sich die Migrationskrise 2015 wiederholt. Dafür brauche es konkrete Maßnahmen wie etwa den Schutz der EU-Außengrenzen, schnellere Asylverfahren, konsequente Abschiebungen und „auch das Signal, dass es für subsidiär Geschützte keinen Nachzug der Familien nach Deutschland gibt “. AUCH INTERESSANT LEXWARE ELEKTRONISCHES FAHRTENBUCH Jetzt Aktionspreis sichern und maximal Steuern sparen! Tschüss 1% -Methode – Schnell & sicher umsteigen und durchschnittlich 2.758 Euro sparen. Rabatt nur bis 31. Dezember! FOTOKASTEN Dein Geschenkefinder Die besten Geschenkideen für ganz besondere Menschen deinem Leben mit fotokasten MEHR ZUR SPD Merkel, Bellevue GROKO-POKER Wenn ’ klappt, wird ’ teuer für die Kanzlerin Waren das die ersten Schritte Richtung Große Koalition? Wie teuer wird die Neuauflage der GroKo für die Kanzlerin? SPD-Bundesvorstand entscheidet Freitag über Sondierungen mit der Union NACH GROKO-GESPRÄCH SPD Freitag über Sondierungen entscheiden Nach dem Treffen Mittwoch mit der Union der SPD-Bundesvorstand Freitag entscheiden, ob die SPD Sondierungen eintritt. Der Fahrplan der Parteien ► Am Sonntagabend berät der CDU-Bundesvorstand über das Vorgehen. ► Am Montag trifft sich zunächst das Präsidium der CDU und danach der Vorstand einer weiteren Runde. ► Am Mittwoch kommen SPD und Union zu ersten offiziellen Gesprächen über eine Neuauflage der GroKo zusammen. ► Am Freitag die SPD entscheiden, ob sie mit der Union Sondierungsgespräche eintritt oder nicht. So geht die SPD die Verhandlungen Am Mittwoch werden sich die Partei- und Fraktionschefs von CDU, CSU und SPD erstmals zusammensetzen, um über mögliche Koalitionsgespräche zu sprechen. „Man geht nicht Verhandlungen mit einem riesigen Rucksack von roten Linien“, warnte SPD-Fraktionschefin Andrea Nahles Freitag im Deutschlandfunk. Dennoch liegt vor möglichen Koalitionsverhandlungen bereits eine Reihe harter Forderungen und Drohungen beider Seiten auf dem Tisch. Die Liste Themen, auf die die eine oder andere Seite unbedingt bestehen oder die sie unbedingt verhindern wollen, wird immer länger. Im Kern sind das Forderungen zur Steuerpolitik, die Bürgerversicherung und das Thema Migration. ► Bei der Steuerpolitik fordert die SPD eine Erhöhung der Steuerlast für hohe Einkommen im Gegenzug zur Entlastung kleiner und mittlerer Einkommen. ► Die SPD die Parität bei den Beiträgen zur gesetzlichen Krankenversicherung, also gleiche Lasten für Arbeitnehmer und Arbeitgeber, wiederherstellen und dazu die allein von den Beschäftigten zu tragenden Zusatzbeiträge abschaffen. Am liebsten würde sie dies im Rahmen einer Bürgerversicherung umsetzen, die zahlreiche Sozialdemokraten als eine entscheidende Voraussetzung für eine große Koalition genannt haben. ►Bei der Migration ist der sensibelste Punkt das Thema Familiennachzug für Flüchtlinge mit eingeschränktem Schutzstatus. Die Begrenzung der Zuwanderung, eine weitere Aussetzung des Familiennachzugs und konsequente Abschiebungen hat der künftige bayerischer Ministerpräsident Söder als Grundbedingungen genannt, die die SPD akzeptieren müsse. Die SPD wiederum aber die Aussetzung des Familiennachzugs über März 2018 hinaus nicht verlängern. Zudem spricht sie sich klar gegen eine Obergrenze für die Aufnahme von Flüchtlingen aus. ► Besonders für die CSU sind die roten Linien der SPD eher ein rotes Tuch. Der designierte bayerische Ministerpräsident Markus Söder ( CSU) wies noch vor den ersten Gesprächen Kernforderungen der SPD klar zurück. „Die Bürgerversicherung bringt nichts “, sagte Söder der „Welt Sonntag“. Und die Vereinigten Staaten von Europa, wie Martin Schulz sie definiert, seien „nicht das, die Mehrheit der Deutschen “, sagte Söder unter Bezug auf die Europa-Vision des SPD-Chefs. In den anstehenden Gesprächen mit der SPD sind Fragen um „Zuwanderung und Familiennachzug“ für Söder wichtiger. Hier sei das Ergebnis der gescheiterten Sondierungsgespräche über ein Jamaika-Bündnis mit CDU, FDP und Grünen aus seiner Sicht „eine gute Basis für die kommenden Verhandlungen “. Nutzen alle Verhandlungen nichts, kommen dann nur noch zwei Szenarien Frage: Neuwahlen oder eine Minderheitsregierung. AKTUELLE UMFRAGEN Bundeskanzlerin Angela Merkel ( M, CDU) mit dem SPD-Chef Martin Schulz ( r) und CSU-Chef Horst Seehofer BILD-WAHLCHECK Der Verlierer der Woche ist... Die SPD-Spitze ändert ihre Meinung Sachen GroKo, die CSU beendet ihr internes Machtgerangel. Diese Partei wird dafür abgestraft. Mit der Zustimmung der SPD zu Groko-Gesprächen stiegt auch die Zustimmung der Bevölkerung NEUE UMFRAGEZAHLEN Groko-Zustimmung steigt deutlich Die Zeichen stehen immer mehr auf Groko. Und die Wähler scheinen das gar nicht mehr schlecht zu finden. Was bedeutet eine Minderheitsregierung? Minderheitsregierungen verfügen über keine eigene Mehrheit. Sie müssen sich deshalb im Parlament immer wieder neue Mehrheiten suchen – und entsprechend auch politische Gegner überzeugen. Es ist ein Modell, dass vor allem skandinavischen Ländern der Normalfall ist, Deutschland aber auf Bundesebene noch nie zum Einsatz kam. Wie könnte eine Minderheitsregierung Deutschland realistisch aussehen? ► Wenn sich die Union als stärkste Fraktion im Parlament entscheidet, eine Minderheitsregierung zu bilden, könnten sie sich der Rückendeckung der SPD versichern ( Tolerierungsmodell). Die Sozialdemokraten müssten sich bereit erklären, die Regierung dauerhaft zu tolerieren. Eine Art „GroKo light“. Und Union und SPD müssten Bundespräsident Frank-Walter-Steinmeier ( 61) für das Modell begeistern. Denn der wirbt bisher eher für eine Fortsetzung der Großen Koalition … BILD Ombudsmann Ernst Elitz Wie würden Neuwahlen ablaufen? Bisher ist die alte Bundesregierung weiterhin geschäftsführend im Amt. Das bleibt lange, bis der Bundespräsident einen Kandidaten zur Kanzlerwahl vorschlägt. Das wird er aber erst tun, wenn es entweder eine klare Regierungsbildung oder einen Plan für eine Minderheitsregierung gibt. So funktioniert eine Minderheitsregierung — infografik info.BILD Jamaika aus Ist klar, dass neu gewählt werden muss, kann das nicht einfach beschlossen werden, sondern ist auch die Kanzlerwahl geknüpft. Neuwahlen sind erst möglich, wenn ein neuer Regierungschef mit nur einer relativer Mehrheit gewählt wird. Dann kann der Bundespräsident den Bundestag auflösen. Innerhalb von 60 Tagen muss es dann Neuwahlen geben. Das wollen aber die Parteien eher nicht, denn laut den aktuellen Umfragen ist wenig Bewegung den Ergebnissen der Parteien und somit wäre die Situation nach der Wahl nicht viel anders als zur Zeit. Und Neuwahlen wären auch ziemlich teuer: Die vergangene Bundestagswahl war mit 92 Millionen Euro Kosten die teuerste aller Zeiten – billiger wäre die nächste Wahl wahrscheinlich nicht.

article8.txt calculate_stopword_frequency: 
arabicazerbaijanidanishdutchenglishfinnishfrenchgermangreekhungarianitaliankazakhnepalinorwegianportugueseromanianrussianspanishswedishturkish

============================================================

article9.txt stemmerize: 
météo - des vent violent sont encor attendus lundi avec des rafal à 130 km/h. il s'accompagneront de plui abondantes, notam dan le massif-centr et dan les alpes. en montagne, le risqu d'avalanch pourrait devenir maxim sur certain secteur des alpes.dan un vast systèm très perturbé étiré de la scandinavi à l'espagne, une dépression s'est creusé dimanch dan le golf de gascogn et pourrait s'étendr jusqu'à lundi. cett dépression a traversé la franc d'ouest en est en provoqu des vent très forts, voir tempétueux à son passag ainsi que des plui abondantes.environ 20.000 foyer étaient privé d'électricité dimanch après-midi dan les département du nord et du pas-de-calai en raison des vent violents. les secteur d'arra et béthune (pas-de-calais), ont été les premier affectés, pui les pann ont touché le littoral, ver boulogne-sur-m et calais, ainsi que le hainaut.la chaîn météo* a placé en alert orang pour le vent une douzain de départements, qui sont: la charent (16), la charente-maritim (17), la girond (33), l'indr (36), les land (40), le nord (59), le pas-de-calai (62), les pyrénées-atlantiqu (64), les deux-sèvr (79), la somm (80), la vendé (85) et vienn (86). météo franc a placé en tout 32 département en vigil orange, pour les risqu de vent forts, de vagu et d'avalanches. dimanche, aux alentour de midi, un ferri avec 300 passag à bord s'est échoué dan le port de calais, dan le pas-de-calai à caus des vent violents.» lire aussi - un ferri s'échoue dan le port de calais, pas de victime● concern les ventslundi matin des vent violent se produiront de la nouvelle-aquitain jusqu'en loire-atlantiqu avec des rafal à 120-130 km/h en bord de mer. malgré un coeffici de maré assez faibl de 55, un risqu modéré de submers est possibl sur le littor au moment de la plein mer. dan l'intérieur des terres, les rafal atteindront de 100 à 110 km/h du poitou au berry. parallèlement, le vent du sud se renforcera brutal des plateaux ardéchoi au lyonnai ver le val de saôn en remont en direct des crêtes jurassienn avec des rafal à 90-100 km/h.lundi après-midi, aprè le passag de la dépression, le vent s'orientera au nord accompagné d'une traîn très activ qui concernera les côtes bretonn et les plage aquitain avec des rafal à 90-100 km/h en bord de mer jusqu'à 120 km/h sur les cap et côtes exposés. près de la méditerranée, le vent du sud soufflera très fort entr la provenc et la côte d'azur, jusqu'à 100 km/h, entraîn un risqu de vagu déferlant à la côte. en corse, le vent atteindra 140 km/h près des cap et côtes exposé de l'île lundi soir.en fin de soiré de lundi, l'épisod de vent violent et tempétueux s'évacuera hor de nos frontièr et les vent faibliront progressivement.● concern les pluiesc vent violent s'accompagneront également de plui abondantes, notam sur l'ouest du massif-centr et dan les alp jusqu'à mardi matin. on attend de 80 à 150 mm de plui en 36 heures, équival à 1 moi de précipitations. ces précipit se feront sous form de neig en montagn au-dessus de 1800 mètres. mai entr 1000 et 1800 mètres, l'altern de redoux et de refroidiss fera grandement fluctuer la limit pluie / neige. en conséquence, le manteau neigeux sera fortement entamé entr 1000 et 1800 mètres.ainsi, la conjonct de la font de la neig et des fort plui en moyenn montagn et d'abondant chute de neig à haut altitud feront réagir les cour d'eau. des risqu d'inond sont possibl près des point bas, notam le long des cour d'eau descend des alp en direct de la provenc côte d'azur, le long des affluent de la dordogn pour le massif-centr et des gave et de l'adour pour les pyrénées.● concern la neig et le risqu d'avalancheen montagne, les fort chute de neig qui se produiront au-dessus de 1800 mètres déstabiliseront le manteau neigeux. avec 1,50 m de neig attendu ver 2000 mètres en l'espac de 36 heures, le risqu d'avalanch pourrait devenir maxim sur certain secteur des alpes.en plaine, lundi après-midi et lundi soir, il neigera beaucoup sur les hauts-de-france, notam au nord de la somme, entr les collin de l'artoi et le valniciennoi où on attend entr 10 et 15 cm de neige.

article9.txt lemmatize: 
météo - des vent violent sont encore attendus lundi avec des rafal à 130 km / h . ils s'accompagneront de plui abondante , notamment dan le massif - central et dan les alpes . en montagne , le risque d'avalanche pourrait devenir maximal sur certain secteur des alpes . dan un vaste système très perturbé étiré de la scandinavie à l'espagne , une dépression s'est creusée dimanche dan le golfe de gascogne et pourrait s'étendre jusqu'à lundi . cette dépression a traversé la france d'ouest en est en provoquant des vent très fort , voire tempétueux à son passage ainsi que des plui abondante . environ 20.000 foyer étaient privés d'électricité dimanche après - midi dan les département du nord et du pas - de - calais en raison des vent violent . les secteur d'arras et béthune ( pas - de - calais ) , ont été les premier affectés , puis les panne ont touché le littoral , ver boulogne - sur - mer et calais , ainsi que le hainaut . la chaîne météo * a placé en alerte orange pour le vent une douzaine de département , qui sont : la charente ( 16 ) , la charente - maritime ( 17 ) , la gironde ( 33 ) , l'indre ( 36 ) , les landes ( 40 ) , le nord ( 59 ) , le pas - de - calais ( 62 ) , les pyrénées - atlantiques ( 64 ) , les deux - sèvres ( 79 ) , la somme ( 80 ) , la vendée ( 85 ) et vienne ( 86 ) . météo france a placé en tout 32 département en vigilance orange , pour les risque de vent fort , de vagu et d'avalanch . dimanche , aux alentour de midi , un ferry avec 300 passager à bord s'est échoué dan le port de calais , dan le pas - de - calais à because des vent violent . » lire aussi - un ferry s'échoue dan le port de calais , pas de victime ● concernant les ventslundi matin des vent violent se produiront de la nouvelle - aquitaine jusqu'en loire - atlantique avec des rafal à 120 - 130 km / h en bord de mer . malgré un coefficient de marée assez faible de 55 , un risque modéré de submersion est possible sur le littoral au moment de la pleine mer . dan l'intérieur des terre , les rafal atteindront de 100 à 110 km / h du poitou au berry . parallèlement , le vent du sud se renforcera brutalement des plateaux ardéchois au lyonnais ver le val de saône en remontant en direction des crêt jurassienne avec des rafal à 90 - 100 km / h . lundi après - midi , après le passage de la dépression , le vent s'orientera au nord accompagné d'une traîne très active qui concernera les côte bretonn et les plage aquitaine avec des rafal à 90 - 100 km / h en bord de mer jusqu'à 120 km / h sur les cap et côte exposés . près de la méditerranée , le vent du sud soufflera très fort entre la provence et la côte d'azur , jusqu'à 100 km / h , entraînant un risque de vagu déferlant à la côte . en corse , le vent atteindra 140 km / h près des cap et côte exposés de l'île lundi soir . en fin de soirée de lundi , l'épisode de vent violent et tempétueux s'évacuera hor de nos frontière et les vent faibliront progressivement . ● concernant les pluiesces vent violent s'accompagneront également de plui abondante , notamment sur l'ouest du massif - central et dan les alpes jusqu'à mardi matin . on attend de 80 à 150 mm de plui en 36 heure , équivalent à 1 mois de précipitation . ce précipitation se feront sous forme de neige en montagne au - dessus de 1800 mètre . mais entre 1000 et 1800 mètre , l'alternance de redoux et de refroidissement fera grandement fluctuer la limite pluie / neige . en conséquence , le manteau neigeux sera fortement entamé entre 1000 et 1800 mètre . ainsi , la conjonction de la fonte de la neige et des fort pluie en moyenne montagne et d'abondant chute de neige à haute altitude feront réagir les cour d'eau . des risqu d'inondation sont possible près des point bas , notamment le long des cour d'eau descendant des alpes en direction de la provence côte d'azur , le long des affluent de la dordogne pour le massif - central et des gaves et de l'adour pour les pyrénées . ● concernant la neige et le risque d'avalancheen montagne , les fort chute de neige qui se produiront au - dessus de 1800 mètr déstabiliseront le manteau neigeux . avec 1,50 m de neige attendu ver 2000 mètre en l'espace de 36 heure , le risque d'avalanche pourrait devenir maximal sur certain secteur des alpes . en plaine , lundi après - midi et lundi soir , il neigera beaucoup sur les hauts - de - france , notamment au nord de la somme , entre les colline de l'artois et le valniciennois où on attend entre 10 et 15 cm de neige .

article9.txt sentence_sentiment_distribution: 
neutralpositive

article9.txt quote_extractor: 


article9.txt stop_word_filter: 
MÉTÉO - Des vents violents sont encore attendus lundi avec des rafales à 130 km/h. Ils s'accompagneront de pluies abondantes, notamment dans le Massif-Central et dans les Alpes. En montagne, le risque d'avalanche pourrait devenir maximal sur certains secteurs des Alpes. Dans un vaste système très perturbé étiré de la Scandinavie à l'Espagne, une dépression s'est creusée dimanche dans le golfe de Gascogne et pourrait s'étendre jusqu'à lundi. Cette dépression traversé la France d'ouest en est en provoquant des vents très forts, voire tempétueux à son passage ainsi que des pluies abondantes. Environ 20.000 foyers étaient privés d'électricité dimanche après-midi dans les départements du Nord et du Pas-de-Calais en raison des vents violents. Les secteurs d'Arras et Béthune ( Pas-de-Calais), ont été les premiers affectés, puis les pannes ont touché le littoral, vers Boulogne-sur-mer et Calais, ainsi que le Hainaut. La chaîne météo* placé en alerte orange pour le vent une douzaine de départements, qui sont: la Charente ( 16), la Charente-Maritime ( 17), la Gironde ( 33), l'Indre ( 36), les Landes ( 40), le Nord ( 59), le Pas-de-Calais ( 62), les Pyrénées-Atlantiques ( 64), les Deux-Sèvres ( 79), la Somme ( 80), la Vendée ( 85) et Vienne ( 86). Météo France placé en tout 32 départements en vigilance orange, pour les risques de vents forts, de vagues et d'avalanches. Dimanche, aux alentours de midi, un ferry avec 300 passagers à bord s'est échoué dans le port de Calais, dans le Pas-de-Calais à cause des vents violents. » LIRE AUSSI - Un ferry s'échoue dans le port de Calais, pas de victime ● Concernant les vents Lundi matin des vents violents se produiront de la Nouvelle-Aquitaine jusqu'en Loire-Atlantique avec des rafales à 120-130 km/h en bord de mer. Malgré un coefficient de marée assez faible de 55, un risque modéré de submersion est possible sur le littoral au moment de la pleine mer. Dans l'intérieur des terres, les rafales atteindront de 100 à 110 km/h du Poitou au Berry. Parallèlement, le vent du Sud se renforcera brutalement des plateaux ardéchois au Lyonnais vers le val de Saône en remontant en direction des crêtes jurassiennes avec des rafales à 90-100 km/h. Lundi après-midi, après le passage de la dépression, le vent s'orientera au Nord accompagné d'une traîne très active qui concernera les côtes bretonnes et les plages aquitaines avec des rafales à 90-100 km/h en bord de mer jusqu'à 120 km/h sur les caps et côtes exposés. Près de la Méditerranée, le vent du Sud soufflera très fort entre la Provence et la côte d'Azur, jusqu'à 100 km/h, entraînant un risque de vagues déferlantes à la côte. En Corse, le vent atteindra 140 km/h près des caps et côtes exposés de l'île lundi soir. En fin de soirée de lundi, l'épisode de vents violents et tempétueux s'évacuera hors de nos frontières et les vents faibliront progressivement. ● Concernant les pluies Ces vents violents s'accompagneront également de pluies abondantes, notamment sur l'ouest du Massif-Central et dans les Alpes jusqu'à mardi matin. On attend de 80 à 150 mm de pluies en 36 heures, équivalent à 1 mois de précipitations. Ces précipitations se feront sous forme de neige en montagne au-dessus de 1800 mètres. Mais entre 1000 et 1800 mètres, l'alternance de redoux et de refroidissements fera grandement fluctuer la limite pluie / neige. En conséquence, le manteau neigeux sera fortement entamé entre 1000 et 1800 mètres. Ainsi, la conjonction de la fonte de la neige et des fortes pluies en moyenne montagne et d'abondantes chutes de neige à haute altitude feront réagir les cours d'eau. Des risques d'inondations sont possibles près des points bas, notamment le long des cours d'eau descendant des Alpes en direction de la Provence côte d'Azur, le long des affluents de la Dordogne pour le Massif-Central et des Gaves et de l'Adour pour les Pyrénées. ● Concernant la neige et le risque d'avalanche En montagne, les fortes chutes de neige qui se produiront au-dessus de 1800 mètres déstabiliseront le manteau neigeux. Avec 1,50 de neige attendu vers 2000 mètres en l'espace de 36 heures, le risque d'avalanche pourrait devenir maximal sur certains secteurs des Alpes. En plaine, lundi après-midi et lundi soir, il neigera beaucoup sur les Hauts-de-France, notamment au nord de la Somme, entre les collines de l'Artois et le Valniciennois où attend entre 10 et 15 cm de neige.

article9.txt calculate_stopword_frequency: 
arabicazerbaijanidanishdutchenglishfinnishfrenchgermangreekhungarianitaliankazakhnepalinorwegianportugueseromanianrussianspanishswedishturkish

============================================================

article10.txt stemmerize: 
est domingo comenzará la cumbr interministeri de la organización mundial de comercio (omc), evento que se realiza cada dos año y que, por primera vez en su historia, tendrá como sede a argentina. la expectativa del gobierno es grande. la casa rosada enmarca esta gestión y la llegada del g-20 en 2018 como los grand logro de cambiemo en pos de la "inserción de argentina en el mundo", y esperan así atraer las ansiada inversion y equilibrar la balanza de comercio exterior.sin embargo, como suced cada dos año en las ciudad sede, la cumbr interministeri se llevará a cabo en medio de protesta de organizacion sociales, que planean una "semana de acción global" contra los tratado de libr comercio.aglutinado en el movimiento "confluencia fuera omc" organizacion sindical como la cta autónoma, ate, la confederación latinoamericana de trabajador del estado (clate), organizacion de derecho humanos, académicos, estudiantiles, de pueblo originarios, y de mujeres, se organizaron para llevar adelant una "anti-cumbre", que tendrá movilizacion pero también foro en los que participarán invitado de todo el mundo.la agenda alternativa a la cumbr comenzó el juev 7 de diciembr (tres días ant del comienzo del encuentro interministerial) con la marcha de la resistencia de las madr de plaza de mayo línea fundadora en plaza de mayo.en tanto, durant la gala que se celebrará el domingo 10 de diciembr por la noche, cuando se estima que el president mauricio macri reciba a los delegado de los 173 país que participarán de la cumbre, se llevará a cabo una movilización desd la plaza de los dos congreso al obelisco.desd ese día hasta el 13 de diciembr (lo que durará la cumbr ofici en el centro cultur kirchner cck), la sede princip de la anti-cumbr será, ademá de las calles, la facultad de ciencia social de la universidad de bueno aires, dond académico argentinos, e internacionales, y las organizacion que integran confluencia fuera omc, encabezarán diverso foro en los que elaborarán propuesta alternativa bajo la premisa "argentina mejor sin tlc".está previsto que la movilización central de la anti-cumbr se realic el mart 12 de diciembr a las 18, aunqu el recorrido aún no fue definido por la organización. un día después, se leerán en una asamblea general los documento que reflejen el trabajo de los distinto foros, y se presenten las propuesta alternativas."la iniciativa surgió el año pasado, como un espacio para discutir acerca de los tratado de libr comercio", explicó a ámbito.com leandro morgenfeld profesor de la uba, investigador del concejo nacion de investigacion científica y tecnológica (conicet), y uno de los organizador de la anti-cumbre.pero, ¿por qué consideran que argentina mejor sin tlc? para morgenfeld, "desd su creación en 1995, la omc fue incorporando un temario en representación de los interes de las grand empresa trasnacionales, que lo que quieren es conseguir mejor condicion para desplegar sus actividad con la menor regulación posibl de los estados"."lo que buscan esto tipo de tratado es limitar la soberanía estat ya sea en materia de regulación medioambiental, salud o educación pública, para que el capit encuentr las mejor condicion para movers de territorio en territorio sin ateners a las regulacion nacionales", argumentó. sin embargo, la confluencia de organizacion que rechazan a la omc, destacan que no solament van en contra de esa agenda, sino que proponen discutir alternativas.para confluencia fuera omc, la idea de que argentina estaba aislada del mundo es falaz: "hay distinta manera de relacionars con el mundo. uno pued relacionars con los país central articulando con sus pare de américa latina y el caribe, como ocurrió mucha veces".morgenfeld expon como ejemplo la cumbr interministeri de cancún en 2003, en la cual los país agroexportador le dijeron por primera vez a los central (eeuu, europa y japón) que no discutirían la liberalización del comercio de manufactura y servicios, con una movilización de más de 50 mil personas.sin lugar a duda, el antecedent de la cumbr de seattle, en 1999, constituy uno de los ejemplo más acabado acerca de cómo una protesta callejera logró frenar el avanc de los tlc. allí, cerca de 40 mil persona se opusieron a la llamada ronda del milenio, cuando un movimiento civil sin precedent sorprendió a los delegado de toda las naciones.sin lugar a dudas, las movilizacion anunciada por los organismo social tendrán en vilo al gobierno de mauricio macri durant las próxima semanas, conscient de que los ojo del mundo estarán puesto en argentina y que, la organización de la cumbr interministeri de la omc, servirá de antecedent directo al g-20.           

article10.txt lemmatize: 
este domingo comenzará la cumbre interministerial de la organización mundial de comercio ( omc ) , evento que se realiza cada do años y que , por primera vez en su historia , tendrá como sede a argentina . la expectativa del gobierno es grande . la casa rosada enmarca esta gestión y la llegada del g-20 en 2018 como los grande logro de cambiemos en pos de la " inserción de argentina en el mundo " , y esperan así atraer las ansiada inversione y equilibrar la balanza de comercio exterior . sin embargo , como sucede cada do años en las ciudade sede , la cumbre interministerial se llevará a cabo en medio de protesta de organizacione sociale , que planean una " semana de acción global " contra los tratado de libre comercio . aglutinados en el movimiento " confluencia fuera omc " organizacione sindicale como la cta autónoma , ate , la confederación latinoamericana de trabajadores del estado ( clate ) , organizacione de derechos humano , académicos , estudiantile , de pueblo originario , y de mujere , se organizaron para llevar adelante una " anti - cumbre " , que tendrá movilizacione pero también foro en los que participarán invitado de todo el mundo . la agenda alternativa a la cumbre comenzó el juev 7 de diciembre ( tre días ante del comienzo del encuentro interministerial ) con la marcha de la resistencia de las madres de plaza de mayo línea fundadora en plaza de mayo . en tanto , durante la gala que se celebrará el domingo 10 de diciembre por la noche , cuando se estima que el presidente mauricio macri reciba a los delegado de lo 173 país que participarán de la cumbre , se llevará a cabo una movilización desde la plaza de los dos congresos al obelisco . desde ese día hasta el 13 de diciembre ( lo que durará la cumbre oficial en el centro cultural kirchner cck ) , la sede principal de la anti - cumbre será , además de las calle , la facultad de ciencias sociales de la universidad de buenos aires , donde académico argentino , e internacionale , y las organizacione que integran confluencia fuera omc , encabezarán diversos foro en los que elaborarán propuesta alternativas bajo la premisa " argentina mejor sin tlc".está previsto que la movilización central de la anti - cumbre se realice el marte 12 de diciembre a las 18 , aunque el recorrido aún no fue definido por la organización . un día después , se leerán en una asamblea general los documento que reflejen el trabajo de los distinto foro , y se presenten las propuesta alternativas."la iniciativa surgió el año pasado , como un espacio para discutir acerca de los tratado de libre comercio " , explicó a ámbito.com leandro morgenfeld profesor de la uba , investigador del concejo nacional de investigaciones científicas y tecnológicas ( conicet ) , y uno de los organizadore de la anti - cumbre . pero , ¿ por qué consideran que argentina mejor sin tlc ? para morgenfeld , " desde su creación en 1995 , la omc fue incorporando un temario en representación de los interes de las grand empresas trasnacionale , que lo que quieren es conseguir mejore condicione para desplegar sus actividad con la menor regulación posible de los estados"."lo que buscan esto tipos de tratado es limitar la soberanía estatal ya sea en materia de regulación medioambiental , salud o educación pública , para que el capital encuentre las mejor condicione para moverse de territorio en territorio sin atenerse a las regulacione nacionale " , argumentó . sin embargo , la confluencia de organizacione que rechazan a la omc , destacan que no solamente van en contra de esa agenda , sino que proponen discutir alternativas . para confluencia fuera omc , la idea de que argentina estaba aislada del mundo es falaz : " hay distinta manera de relacionarse con el mundo . uno puede relacionarse con los país centrale articulando con sus pare de américa latina y el caribe , como ocurrió mucha veces".morgenfeld expone como ejemplo la cumbre interministerial de cancún en 2003 , en la cual los país agroexportadore le dijeron por primera vez a los centrale ( eeuu , europa y japón ) que no discutirían la liberalización del comercio de manufactura y servicio , con una movilización de más de 50 mil persona . sin lugar a duda , el antecedente de la cumbre de seattle , en 1999 , constituye uno de los ejemplo más acabado acerca de cómo una protesta callejera logró frenar el avance de lo tlc . allí , cerca de 40 mil persona se opusieron a la llamada ronda del milenio , cuando un movimiento civil sin precedent sorprendió a los delegado de todas las nacione . sin lugar a duda , las movilizacion anunciada por los organismo social tendrán en vilo al gobierno de mauricio macri durante las próxima semana , consciente de que los ojos del mundo estarán puesto en argentina y que , la organización de la cumbre interministerial de la omc , servirá de antecedente directo al g-20 .           

article10.txt sentence_sentiment_distribution: 
neutralnegative

article10.txt quote_extractor: 


article10.txt stop_word_filter: 
Este domingo comenzará la cumbre interministerial de la Organización Mundial de Comercio ( OMC), evento que se realiza cada dos años que, por primera vez en su historia, tendrá como sede Argentina. La expectativa del Gobierno es grande. La Casa Rosada enmarca esta gestión la llegada del G-20 en 2018 como los grandes logros de Cambiemos en pos de la ``inserción de Argentina en el mundo '', esperan así atraer las ansiadas inversiones equilibrar la balanza de comercio exterior. Sin embargo, como sucede cada dos años en las ciudades sede, la cumbre interministerial se llevará cabo en medio de protestas de organizaciones sociales, que planean una`` semana de acción global'' contra los tratados de libre comercio. Aglutinados en el movimiento ``Confluencia Fuera OMC ''organizaciones sindicales como la CTA Autónoma, ATE, la Confederación Latinoamericana de Trabajadores del Estado ( CLATE), organizaciones de derechos humanos, académicos, estudiantiles, de pueblos originarios, de mujeres, se organizaron para llevar adelante una`` anti-cumbre'', que tendrá movilizaciones pero también foros en los que participarán invitados de todo el mundo. La agenda alternativa la cumbre comenzó el jueves 7 de diciembre ( tres días antes del comienzo del encuentro interministerial) con la Marcha de la Resistencia de las Madres de Plaza de Mayo Línea Fundadora en Plaza de Mayo. En tanto, durante la gala que se celebrará el domingo 10 de diciembre por la noche, cuando se estima que el presidente Mauricio Macri reciba los delegados de los 173 países que participarán de la cumbre, se llevará cabo una movilización desde la Plaza de los Dos Congresos al Obelisco. Desde ese día hasta el 13 de diciembre ( lo que durará la cumbre oficial en el Centro Cultural Kirchner CCK), la sede principal de la anti-cumbre será, además de las calles, la Facultad de Ciencias Sociales de la Universidad de Buenos Aires, donde académicos argentinos, e internacionales, las organizaciones que integran Confluencia Fuera OMC, encabezarán diversos foros en los que elaborarán propuestas alternativas bajo la premisa ``Argentina mejor sin TLC ''. Está previsto que la movilización central de la anti-cumbre se realice el martes 12 de diciembre las 18, aunque el recorrido aún fue definido por la organización. Un día después, se leerán en una asamblea general los documentos que reflejen el trabajo de los distintos foros, se presenten las propuestas alternativas.`` La iniciativa surgió el año pasado, como un espacio para discutir acerca de los tratados de libre comercio'', explicó ámbito.com Leandro Morgenfeld profesor de la UBA, investigador del Concejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas Tecnológicas ( CONICET), uno de los organizadores de la anti-cumbre. Pero, ¿por qué consideran que Argentina mejor sin TLC? Para Morgenfeld, ``desde su creación en 1995, la OMC fue incorporando un temario en representación de los intereses de las grandes empresas trasnacionales, que lo que quieren es conseguir mejores condiciones para desplegar sus actividades con la menor regulación posible de los Estados ''.`` Lo que buscan estos tipos de tratados es limitar la soberanía estatal ya sea en materia de regulación medioambiental, salud educación pública, para que el capital encuentre las mejores condiciones para moverse de territorio en territorio sin atenerse las regulaciones nacionales'', argumentó. Sin embargo, la confluencia de organizaciones que rechazan la OMC, destacan que solamente van en contra de esa agenda, sino que proponen discutir alternativas. Para Confluencia Fuera OMC, la idea de que Argentina estaba aislada del mundo es falaz: ``Hay distintas maneras de relacionarse con el mundo. Uno puede relacionarse con los países centrales articulando con sus pares de América Latina el Caribe, como ocurrió muchas veces ''. Morgenfeld expone como ejemplo la cumbre interministerial de Cancún en 2003, en la cual los países agroexportadores le dijeron por primera vez los centrales ( EEUU, Europa Japón) que discutirían la liberalización del comercio de manufacturas servicios, con una movilización de más de 50 mil personas. Sin lugar duda, el antecedente de la cumbre de Seattle, en 1999, constituye uno de los ejemplos más acabados acerca de cómo una protesta callejera logró frenar el avance de los TLC. Allí, cerca de 40 mil personas se opusieron la llamada Ronda del Milenio, cuando un movimiento civil sin precedentes sorprendió los delegados de todas las naciones. Sin lugar dudas, las movilizaciones anunciadas por los organismos sociales tendrán en vilo al Gobierno de Mauricio Macri durante las próximas semanas, consciente de que los ojos del mundo estarán puestos en Argentina que, la organización de la cumbre interministerial de la OMC, servirá de antecedente directo al G-20.

article10.txt calculate_stopword_frequency: 
arabicazerbaijanidanishdutchenglishfinnishfrenchgermangreekhungarianitaliankazakhnepalinorwegianportugueseromanianrussianspanishswedishturkish

============================================================

