All eyes on Soleimani. Quds Force Commander Qasem Soleimani's return to Tehran marks an end to a much covered trip to Iraq. The head of Iran's Quds Force, Gen. Qasem Soleimani, has returned to Iran from his Iraq trip with harsh words for both the Islamic State (IS) militants that overran parts of Iraq and the United States and its coalition. Soleimani's trip to Iraq to advise Iraqi forces fighting IS was unusually public for a general who has issued very few statements and given even fewer interviews throughout his career. From early September all the way through last week, numerous pictures of the commander, who Western media organizations often call "shadowy," posing with Iraqi forces and sometimes even smiling for the camera appeared on Twitter, Facebook and Iranian websites. The sheer quantity of pictures of Soleimani in Iraq with various armed groups seemed a like an Iranian message to neighboring countries and the United States and its coalition that Iran had boots on the ground while they did not. Soleimani's return to Tehran to attend a memorial for an Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps commander was treated with the same media hype as his Iraq trip. Pictures of Soleimani standing next to commander Mohammad Ali Jafifari and talking to reporters were published on Iranian websites and social media pages. "Whether it is the actions of the Americans or the terrorist acts of [IS], it is condemned to failure because it is without truth," Soleimani told reporters at the memorial. He attributed the victories oflran to an "inner truth" and added, "Their strategy will not be victorious. And we saw what they did in Syria, but they did not get results." Soleimani also praised former deputy commander of the Revolutionary Guard's ground forces, Nourali Shoushtari, as the "founder of ethics" who broke new ground on the battlefield. Shoushtari was killed in a suicide blast while meeting tribal leaders in the Sistan-Baluchistan province in October 2009. Even the Reformist media, which provided less coverage of military matters than conservative websites and newspapers, covered Soleimani's return. In an article headlined, "All eyes are focused on this man," Etemaad wrote about the enigma of Soleimani. He was described as "a man about whose particular services, very few knew until recently, when they suddenly became top news." The article suggested that perhaps Soleimani "did not dislike" coming out from behind the curtains and in a way, viewed it as a kind of "media hegemony." In its article, "Qasem Soleimani is a daring commander," Shargh Daily interviewed Kurdish commander Hiwa Rasoul Omar Latif. Latif said that the Kurdish Peshmerga and Iranian forces, particularly those led by Soleimani, have the ability to defeat IS. He called Soleimani a "daring commander" and said that those under his command "listen" to his orders. Latif talked of "a great deal of cooperation" between his own forces and Soleimani's and said that "Soleimani and his friends" have been successful in Iraq  As Shiite militias in Iraq attempt to become potent political actors, they may follow Hezbollah's Lebanese model: using military leverage over the government to wrestle power on Iran's behalf. Following the rapid spread of ISIS in the summer of 2014, Shiite Marja Ali al-Sistani issued a fatwa calling all able-bodied men to defend Baghdad and push back against ISIS. Men of all sects and ethnicities, overwhelmingly Shiite, took it upon themselves to fight this "great evil" that had overtaken their country. These Popular Mobilization Units (PMUs) have made a fundamental difference in the battle against ISIS and are hailed as heroes in Iraq. A problem arises, however, when one looks at the large number of hardline Shiite factions of the PMUs that are directly funded, trained, and armed by Iran. This Iranian support has rightly worried many, as the rise of the PMUs unnervingly mimics multiple aspects of Hezbollah's rise in Lebanon. By looking at parallels between how Hezbollah and factions of the PMUs use politics, foreign influence, and propaganda to increase their power, the United States might be able to track similar trends in Iraqi's hardline Shiite militias, and move to stop this before a similar situation occurs. In the mid 1980s, Hezbollah was a rather simple resistance militia in South Lebanon that formed in response to the Israeli occupation. Initially, they slowly amassed power through their performance on the battlefield, absorbing smaller Shiite militias and taking advantage of a weak political system. The group would later confront Israel again on the battlefield in 2006, inflicting heavy casualties and forcing an Israeli withdrawal. Hezbollah's consistent military success in Lebanon translated well into politics. Some worry that Hezbollah will try to dismantle the Taif Accord and reconstruct the country's governing arrangement to their benefit. While they were participating in elections in 1992, they were able to publicly threaten former prime minister Saad Hariri in 2006 after he called on them to lay down their arms. Now, Hezbollah leads a powerful bloc in the Lebanese parliament, essentially bestowing their ally Michel Aoun with the presidency after two years of deadlock. The PMUs in Iraq are hinting they want to transform from militias into organized political structures. Hezbollah provides a potential model as they attempt to do so. The PMUs are trying to use their military leverage over the Iraqi government to wrestle power on behalf of Iran, much like Hezbollah did in Lebanon. The PMUs have used their allies in parliament to weaken current prime minister Haider al-Abadi and his cabinet through an anticorruption committee designed to oust Abadi's allies. The PMU's greatest ally in government is corrupt former premier Nouri al-Maliki, whose marginalization of Sunni communities paved the way for the rise of ISIS. Maliki has also backed PMU leaders who want to further institutionalize their militias into more permanent structures, akin to Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC). Recently, Iraq's Supreme Court ruled against a decision by Abadi to eliminate the three largely ceremonial vice presidential positions, one of which is held by Maliki. This further weakens Abadi's political standing by overruling one of his most important measures to streamline popular support for curtailing government corruption and thus leaving his main opponent in power. In cffect, with Maliki's help, what Hezbollah took twenty years to accomplish the PMUs could accomplish in two years. Hezbollah has received Iranian-supplied weaponry, monetary aid, and combat training, with over 3,000 Hezbollah militants having undergone training in Iran on guerrilla warfare tactics, firing missiles and rockets, operating drones, and marine warfare. Iran has launched airstrikes in Iraq in support of PMUs, and there are many examples of Qasem Soleimani, senior Iranian military officer and commander of the Qods Force, advising and directing Iraqi forces into battle. In addition, there are strong parallels between how the Iraqi PMUs mimic Hezbollah by sidelining any non-Iranian-backed Shiite groups or figures, as they have done with the Amal Movement. Iran's Hezbollah brand has existed in Iraq since 2003 in the form of Kataib Hezbollah, which fought against American and coalition forces during Iraq's sectarian strife in 2007 and has a near exact copy of Hezbollah's logo on its flag. One of the group's leaders, Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis, was a former advisor to Iran's Qods Force, openly received training and funding from the Qods Force and Lebanese Hezbollah, and worked with the IRGC during the Iraq-Iran War. He is now the deputy chairman of the Popular Mobilization Committee for the PMUs in Iraq. Another PMU leader and prominent Shiite cleric, Qais al-Khazali, said that the "Mosul battle is revenge against the descendants of the killers of Hussein." Khazali, who backed Maliki in the 2014 elections, is notorious for supposedly backing Iran during the Iraq-Iran War. PMU commander Hadi al-Ameri, the former Iraqi minister of transportation and head of the Badr Organization, similarly fought alongside Iran during the Iran-Iraq War. He has been accused of overseeing flights of Iranian weapons shipments headed to Syria and recently expressed praise for Qasem Soleimani. This cross-pollination of Shiite groups, PMUs, the Qods Force, and Lebanese Hezbollah is seen even more clearly in the Syrian theater, where many of these forces are bridged by land and brought closer together by common enemies and direct Iranian support. Traditional Shiite resistance theology, specifically the martyrdom of Hussein, is used by Hezbollah and the PMUs to justify their actions. Both groups are adept at tapping into nationalist pride and collective national sentiment in order to bolster their cause. Hezbollah drew popular support from many Lebanese civilians, including many non-Shiites, for the rockets they launched at Israel and subsequent guerrilla warfare in 2006. Hezbollah even runs the Museum for Resistance Tourism a few hours from Beirut, where they tout their victories by showcasing exhibitions of destroyed Israeli tanks and large portraits of Hassan Nasrallah. More recently, Hezbollah received praise from many Lebanese for protecting the border with Syria from any ISIS/Jabhat al-Nusra incursions, and continues to receive praise by advocating for the Palestinian cause. While PMUs cannot boast the same amount of institutionalized support, they are still admired by millions in Iraq for putting their lives on the line to fight ISIS. Similar to Nasrallah's sympathy for suffering Christians in Iraq and Egypt, the PMUs regularly lament the genocide of Christians with flashy videos featuring soldiers liberating churches, protecting nuns from ISIS, and praying alongside old Christian women and children. Leaders of the PMUs have even promoted a Chaldean Catholic leader, Rayyan al-Kildani, who purportedly runs a Christian PMU. Shiites in Lebanon and Iraq exist as two separate and unique communities; they have varied histories, narratives, theological doctrines, and unique social dynamics. However, what is clear is that in both situations, Iran has taken advantage of chaos to bolster its proxies. The future of Iraq has a wide range of possible outcomes, from national reconciliation to an all-out intra-Shiite conflict in the south when militias return to places like Dhi Qar or al-Muthanna provinces. Even though it is yet to be seen what will happen, an outcome in which the PMUs run for parliament or back a political party will have disastrous consequences, possibly providing fodder for the rise of ISIS 2.0. It has yet to be seen how the PMUs will act after Mosul, but the United States and Abadi would be wise to plan ahead and ensure that Iran doesn't have its way again. The Abadi government can take certain steps to prevent the rise of PMUs after Mosul. Not all Iraqi Shiites are pro-Iranian puppets: in fact, many are fervidly nationalistic. Abadi can tap into Iraqi nationalism to combat further sectarian division. These battle-hardened men must be rewarded for abandoning the PMUs, collected into the Iraqi army, and cither trained in formal military rules of engagement or funneled into the workforce. The United States must pull whatever strings it can in Baghdad, Tehran, or Moscow to prevent PMU leaders from transforming into institutionalized political leaders. If no precautions are taken, the Middle East will end up with a country over five times the population of Lebanon under direct control of Iran. With Iraqi nationalism at its highest in years due to the Mosul offensive, the United States should take advantage of this to unify Iraq. The PMUs' powers will need to be widely curtailed once ISIS is defeated, and Washington should condition military aid on political progress. Lastly, the United States should promote good governance through meritocracy and accountability in government. This will go a long way toward preventing outside forces from having their say in Iraq's affairs. Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei warned the Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi on Tuesday against any measures that could weaken the Tehran-backed Shi'ite paramilitary groups, saying such actions would endanger Baghdad's stability. At a meeting in Tehran, Khamenei said the Shi'ite militias were Iraq's main forces pushing back Sunni jihadist groups, and Baghdad should not trust the United States in the fight against the Islamic State, Iranian state media reported. The Shi'ite militias, known as Popular Mobilisation Forces (PMF) helped Baghdad defend the country against the Islamic State militant group when Iraqi military and police divisions deserted en masse in 2014. But Sunnis in areas freed from Islamic State control say the Shi'ite militias have carried out looting, abductions and murder. Some Arab leaders in northern Iraq have asked for the PMF to be dissolved or expelled from their Sunni- majority provinces. "The Daesh is retreating from Iraq and that is thanks to the government's trust in these young devoted forces," Khamenei told Abadi in Tehran. "The Americans are against Popular Forces because they want Iraq to lose its main source of strength," he added. U.S.-backed Iraqi forces have also dislodged Islamic State from Iraqi cities the militants captured, and are about to fully capture Mosul, which used to be their de facto capital in the country. Abadi belongs to the Dawa party, a Shi'ite group with close ties to Iran. But he has managed relations with the Sunnis better than his predecessor, Nuri al-Maliki, and also improved Baghdad's ties with Saudi Arabia. Khamenei asked Abadi not to trust the Americans in their fight against the Islamic State, as "they and their regional allies (Saudi Arabia) have created Daesh with their money and do not wish to fully eliminate them" in Iraq. He said Iran was against the presence of American forces in Iraq under any circumstance including training Iraqi forces. "We should remain vigilant of the Americans and not trust them. The Americans and their followers are against Iraq's independence, unity and identity," Khamenei said. Khamenei also reiterated Iran's disagreement with any measure that threatened the territorial integrity of Iraq and divides the country. French President Emmanuel Macron cast himself as the antithesis of Donald Trump at the United Nations on Tuesday, a position that could enable him to play the honest broker in international conflicts. A few hours after the U.S. president pugnaciously defended his unilateralist America First doctrine and launched scathing verbal attacks on North Korea and Iran, Macron took to the same stage to advance a diametrically opposed stance. "Multilateralism is the most efficient way to face global challenges. It is the realization of a vision of the world that protects us," Macron said in his first address to the U.N. annual gathering of world leaders in New York. The response to Trump was barely veiled when he added minutes later that multilateralism was "also believing that the United Nations has all its legitimacy to act and maintain international balances." Despite Trump's unpredictable foreign policy, Macron has sought not to isolate Washington, sensing an opportunity to sway its thinking and elevate the role of France, a nuclear power and permanent member of the U.N. Security Council, in global affairs. As part of that, Macron has also sought to improve ties with Russia despite its tense relationship with the West. While Trump on Tuesday called a 2015 nuclear deal with Iran an "embarrassment" and the "worst ever", Macron staunchly defended it as "good" and labeled its opponents as "irresponsible." "That President Trump thinks that this agreement is not perfect and doesn't protect enough is an argument that I can hear, but I asked him what was his alternative proposal. I didn't understand it," Macron later told reporters. He quickly followed the criticism with an acknowledgment that Trump's fears were not completely irrational. "I'm proposing additional elements (to the deal) that are independent, but that will alleviate concerns that the United States and countries in the region may have," Macron said. Despite little prospect of getting Iran and the United States around the same table to push a new peace initiative to end a six-year-old Syria civil war, Macron suggested he would try to mediate between the two rivals. "If we don't resolve the Syrian problem with Iran around the table, then we will not have an efficient response because Iran today is among the powers that have an influence on the ground," Macron said. Paris is trying to set up an international contact group on Syria to revive stalled peace talks in Geneva, but Trump's anti-Iran stance has partly complicated those efforts. "Noting the U.S. refusal today, I want that the contact group advances and that the United Nations and France can serve as intermediaries with Iran," Macron said. "Multilateralism must do everything to avoid war. Every time we have forgotten this and tried to get a short- term satisfactory solution without a diplomatic roadmap we failed and that was the case in Iraq and Libya," Macron said. "With North Korea we are not there. I think it is untimely to put forward the threat of war," he added, urging better implementation of sanctions to pressure Pyongyang back to peace talks. Despite clear differences on policy, Macron has repeatedly emphasized that he shares certain objectives with Trump, making crushing Islamic State and countering global terrorism leading priorities. "We have an exemplary relationship with the United States in fighting terrorism in Africa and the Middle East," Macron said. While Trump irked Macron with his decision to pull out of a landmark international accord reached in Paris in 2015 to fight climate change, the French leader has not given up on trying to get Trump to reconsider. "We have a disagreement on climate. President Trump said he wanted to leave the deal, but on a legal basis he still needs to put that into action so it's not a legal reality yet. BAGHDAD - Prominent Iraqi Shia leaders led reconciliation efforts on Tuesday between the powerful cleric Muqtada al-Sadr and his rivals to defuse tensions and pave the way for a unified Shia political alliance ahead of the next parliamentary elections, senior Shia leaders said. Over the past 10 years, new Shia militias have been formed, while other armed groups have split off from the Mehdi Army, the former armed wing of Sadr's movement, including the prominent Asaib Ahl al-Haq and Kataib Huzballa-lraq. These new organisation have challenged Sadr politically. Since then, tensions between Sadr and his former allies have intensified amid rounds of fighting that have erupted dozens of times among their followers. The fight against Islamic State (IS) group militants who seized almost a third of Iraq's territories in June 2014 has kept Shia militias, which are backing government forces, engaged. However, as the pushback against IS draws towards an end with the battle for Mosul, fears of disputes resurfacing between armed Shia factions have been renewed. The reconciliation between the Sadrist armed factions has sent assurances to Iraqis that anticipated Shia in-fighting may be delayed. Televised footage broadcast by Sadr's office showed the cleric in his house in Najaf in a meeting with Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis, the top commander of the Popular Mobilisation Units (PMU), and Hadi al-Amiri, head of the Badr Organisation, a powerful paramilitary group and political party. Both men were in military uniforms and sat next to the cleric. The PMUs, a coalition led by various Shia Iraqi militias, have played a major role in the government offensive against IS. Qais al-Khazaili, commander of Asaib Ahl al-Haq and one of Sadr's main political rivals, Akram al-Qaibi of al-Nujabaa, Adnan al-Shahmani of Ressaliun Brigades and other PMU leaders sat nearby. The men looked like they were involved in friendly talks at the gathering. "The meeting was cordial and dominated by optimism. All the disputes were settled," Ahmed al-Assadi, of Jund al-lmam Brigade, told MEE. "Actually, this is a message for all to close the door in the face of enemies and rivals who may try to take advantage of these disputes [between Shia factions]." Khazaili, Qaibi and Shahmani were prominent leaders in the Mahdi Army and remained close to Sadr until 2006, when they turned against him in protest against his push to centralise all decisions to his office. The three men, in addition to many others, left the Najaf-based cleric to form the Asaib and Kataib militias, which carried out several deadly attacks against the US army in Iraq between 2007 and 2011. Sadr had publicly criticised the militias, accusing them of being involved in sectarian killings and kidnappings in Baghdad and other provinces. Tuesday's reconciliation talks, which lasted for more than three hours, were the first meeting between Sadr, Khazaili and Qaibi since 2006. Previous efforts made to bring the three leaders together were aborted by Sadr. Sources involved in the meeting told MEE that "the men discussed all the disputed issues, including their visions for the future of Iraq and how to protect it from any foreign attacks". "The session was good, productive and brotherly ... Everyone is working for the interest of Iraq and to liberate the land. All of us are supporting the Iraqi Army in Mosul and Anbar and everywhere," Sadr said in the televised news conference after the meeting. "[Discussing the post-IS period] was one of the issues addressed during the meeting. We agreed on something for the future of Iraq after Daesh," Sadr added, using an Arabic acronym for IS. Sadr expressed optimism and said he hopes that all concerns about Iraq after IS will be resolved in future meetings. "As long as the army is capturing the land and leading the liberation battles, my biggest fears are gone," Sadr said. Several of those who attended the meeting told MEE that Sadr was concerned with the role of armed factions after Mosul is recaptured by pro- government forces. Sadr also discussed how to support the state and incorporate the PMUs in government security forces to make them "completely led by the government and submitting to formal military laws". Two senior Shia commanders told MEE on the condition of anonymity that the reconciliation efforts were started months ago by Sami al-Masoudi, a prominent leader of the Islamic Shia party of Fadhila. "The real goal is forming a big political bloc to participate the next election," one of the commanders said. The Fadhila Party is also a split-off from the Sadr Movement. "If they [the leaders of Fadhila party] succeed, this means the next biggest parliamentary bloc will be controlled by Sadr and the prime minister's post will be in his hand," a source said.  Abu Mahdi al Muhandis. the deputy commander of the Iraq's Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF), gave an in-depth interview last week with the pro- Iranian, pan-Arab satellite television channel Al Mayadeen, in which he confirmed the presence of Lebanese Hezbollah in Iraq. In the interview, Muhandis said that there was a "very good" relationship between his PMF and Hezbollah, carried out with "the knowledge and agreement" of the Iraqi government. He said that both Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki and Haidar al-Abadi were aware of the relationship from the outset, "down to the minute details." He said that PMF "benefited greatly" from Hezbollah's support, who played a "central" and "very important" role in the PMF's battle-readiness. Muhandis said "the brothers in Hezbollah" sent advisors to Iraq from the beginning of the battles against ISIS. Along with Iran, Hezbollah helped the PMF "with training and planning, and with weapons and equipment." However, he also hinted that Hezbollah's role may not have been exclusively advisory, saying that the Lebanon-based Shiite group "offered martyrs" on Iraq's battlefields. The relationship between the PMF and Hezbollah, Muhandis noted, was not merely one of solidarity against their common foe of ISIS, but as with the PMF's relationship with Iran. They consider the Lebanese Shiite group a "friend, ally and partner in the region." He noted that with the consent of the Iraqi government, the PMF would continue its relationship and alliance with Hezbollah beyond the battle for Mosul or the immediate fight against ISIS. On a personal level, Mudandis said he was "honored" to have a "long-standing" relationship with Hezbollah's Secretary General, Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah, whom he called "master {sayyed) of the Resistance" and a regional symbol. He also spoke of his long-standing personal relationship with two of Hezbollah's storied founders and former military commanders, Imad Mughniyeh and Mustafa Badreddine, whom he called "the great martyrs." Describing his relationship with the two late commanders as "firm and operational," he said Mughniyeh and Badreddine were the first to come to Iraq in the early 1980's to train "Iraqi [Shiite] jihadi rejectionist groups," to fight Saddam Hussein. Beginning in the 1980's and for years afterwards, Muhandis - born Jamal Jaafar Mohammad Ali Aal-Ibrahim - worked alongside Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and its Iraqi proxy Badr Organization. Along with Badreddine, Muhandis was part of the militant group Dawa 17. They were involved in the 1983 near-simultaneous bombings of the US and French embassies in Kuwait, the Kuwaiti airport, the Raytheon Corporation's headquarters, a Kuwait National Petroleum Company oil-rig, and a government-owned power station. The attacks killed five people and injured 86. Along with Badreddine, Muhandis was also linked to the 1985 attempted assassination of Kuwait's emir. Muhandis recalled that after 2003, Badreddine and Mughniyeh returned to Iraq to "train, aid and prepare" Iraqi Shiite militias against US forces in Iraq, himself included. At that time, Muhandis served as the leader of Kataib Hezbollah, an Iranian-sponsored Shiite militia which carried out deadly attacks that killed hundreds of US troops in Iraq. He helped smuggle improvised explosive dcvices in from Iran and Hezbollah. Known as explosively formed penetrators (EFPs), those explosive devices were the primary killer of US troops in Iraq from 2003 to 2011. As a result, Muhandis was listed by the US government as a specially designated global terrorist in July 2009, and was described as an advisor to Qassem Soleimani, the commander of the external arm of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, the Quds Force. Muhandis said the Badreddine and Mughniyeh played a "very important" and "central" role in training Iraqi Shiite "mujahidin forces" and organizing them as "resistance cells against the Americans." This greatly benefited the PMF, as Muhandis noted that "large proportion" of the PMF's fighters "come from the cadres of those who fought the American presence in Iraq." Muhandis also spoke of the PMF's relationship with other countries and groups. Most important among those was with Iran which, along with Hezbollah, served as the "cornerstone" of support for the PMF, supplying them with "weapons, ammunition, [battle] planning and advisors." He said that though the PMF now purchases weapons from the Islamic Republic and Hezbollah with Iraqi government funds, in the past both Tehran and the Shiite group gave them aid freely and "with great generosity." He also noted that while the Americans did not aid the PMF in the battles to defend Irbil and Baghdad, the Iranians did. He stressed that the PMF neither wanted nor needed a relationship with the United States. However, they do want peaceful relations with Turkey and have open communication with the Russians. He said Moscow had placed intelligence assets and the representative of the Russian Defense Minister in Iraq. He noted that the head of the PMF, Falih al-Fayyad, was on a trip to Moscow at the time of the interview and that talks were underway for Russia to arm the PMF. Muhandis denied the presence of PMF fighters in Yemen "in an official manner," aiding the Houthis, whom he described as "brothers." However, he did say that, "there could be Iraqis there in one capacity or another," and confirmed the existence of political ties between the PMF and Ansarullah. Like his allies in Hezbollah, Muhandis believes in establishing a Shiite theocracy on the Iranian model, and considers himself a representative of Iran's Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei. His future plans for the PMF also sound similar to Hezbollah's model in Lebanon. Hezbollah - which claimed it was resisting the Israeli occupation of south Lebanon - refused to disarm after the IDF withdrew from Lebanon on May 25, 2000. Likewise, Muhandis now says PMF will not disarm after the battle for Mosul. And like Hezbollah, which claims its presence is still necessary because Israel still occupies Lebanese lands and either the Jewish state or Sunni Islamists could attack Lebanon in the future, Muhandis said the PMF's continued presence would still be required because Iraq still needed to be "cleansed of ISIS." He hinted that the PMF would remain in existence even after that because of the fear that ISIS could return in another form, "just like the Baath [Party] transformed into al-Qaeda, which itself became ISIS, and who knows what will come in the future?" Muhandis also said that after the battle for Mosul and Iraq, his fighting groups would "go to any area that threatens the security of Iraq." Then, with the consent of the Iraqi and Syrian governments, PMF intended to "fight ISIS" in Syria, noting the presence of Iraqi Shiite militias fighting on behalf of Bashar al-Assad. He also stressed the "constitutional and legal right" individual PMF members to pursue political careers.    