A Popular Mobilization T-72 tank and BMP are destroyed by 2 guided missiles in Salihiyyah and Faysaliyyah villages north of Tal Abtah town south of #TalAfar.
A martyrdom operation kills at least 9 SWAT forces personnel and destroys an Abrams tank and 2 bulldozers in Barid neighborhood in northeastern #Mosul.
American warplanes launch 12 raids on roads leading to the last remaining bridge in #Mosul city.
A martyrdom operation strikes Popular Mobilization militants as they attempted to advance towards Faysaliyyah village north of Tal Abtah town southwest of #TalAfar.
At least 21 Popular Mobilization militants are killed and injured and a Cougar and 3 other vehicles are destroyed following a second martyrdom operation near Faysaliyyah village southwest of #TalAfar.
A Popular Mobilization BMP and tank are destroyed by 2 guided missiles in Faysaliyyah village north of Tal Abtah town southwest of #TalAfar.
3 martyrdom attacks with rigged vehicles strike Iraqi forces near Salam Hospital in Wahdah neighborhood in southeastern #Mosul.
More than 30 Iraqi forces personnel are killed and 2 BMPs, a Humvee, and several vehicles are destroyed following martyrdom attacks in southeastern #Mosul.
2 Iraqi forces BMPs are destroyed and a third is seized by Islamic State fighters near Salam Hospital in southeastern #Mosul.
A fourth martyrdom operation destroys a BMP and kills 5 Iraqi troops near Salam Hospital in southeastern #Mosul.
Residents of #Mosul Speak about American Airstrikes on the Last Bridge of the City
An Iraqi forces Humvee is destroyed near Salam Hospital in Wahdah neighborhood in southeastern #Mosul.
2 Iraqi forces BMPs are destroyed and a third is seized by Islamic State fighters near Salam Hospital in southeastern #Mosul.
2 American airstrikes mistakenly hit Iraqi forces personnel near Salam Hospital in southeastern #Mosul.
A Martyrdom Operation and Clashes Today Near Salam Hospital in Southeastern #Mosul
Video footage of the clashes that took place on the outskirts of #Bakr neighbourhood eastern #Mosul