Sam Wyer
MIDDLE EAST SECURITY REPORT 7
THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ
December 2012
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼
Photo Credit: Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq protest in Kadhimiya, Baghdad, September 2012. Photo posted on Twitter by Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq.
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of
this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
©2012 by the Institute for the Study of War.
Published in 2012 in the United States of America by the Institute for the Study of War.
1400 16th Street NW, Suite 515 Washington, DC 20036. http://www.understandingwar.org
Sam Wyer
MIDDLE EAST SECURITY REPORT 7
THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ
￼
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Sam Wyer is a Research Analyst at the Institute for the Study of War, where he focuses on Iraqi security and political matters. Prior to joining ISW, he worked as a Research Intern at AEI’s Critical Threats Project where he researched Iraqi Shi’a militia groups and Iranian proxy strategy. He holds a Bachelor’s Degree in Political Science from Middlebury College in Vermont and studied Arabic at Middlebury’s school in Alexandria, Egypt.
ABOUT THE INSTITUTE
The Institute for the Study of War (ISW) is a non-partisan, non-profit, public policy research organization. ISW advances an informed understanding of military affairs through reliable research, trusted analysis, and innovative education. ISW is committed to improving the nation’s ability
to execute military operations and respond to emerging threats in order to achieve U.S. strategic objectives.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many thanks to Jessica Lewis, Marisa Sullivan, and Stephen Wicken for their indispensable assistance, editing, and insight through the many iterations of this report. I’d also like to thank Maggie Rackl for her formatting expertise, Omar Abdullah for his translation help, David Cutler for his knowledge on all things Bahrain, and Will Fulton for his initial guidance and continued support.
￼
￼ExECUTIVE SUMMARy
MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
This report examines the political, religious, and military resurgence of Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq (AAH) in Iraq since the withdrawal of U.S. Forces, identifying the group’s key actors, their present disposition and strategy, and their regional expansion. AAH is an Iranian-backed Shi’a militant group that split from Moqtada al-Sadr’s Jaish al-Mahdi (JAM) in 2006. Since that time, AAH has conducted thousands of lethal explosively formed penetrator (EFP) attacks against U.S. and Iraqi forces, targeted kidnappings of Westerners, rocket and mortar attacks on the U.S. Embassy, the murder of American soldiers, and the assassination of Iraqi officials.
AAH has close connections to Iran. The Lebanese Hezbollah operative Ali Mussa Daqduq, who was detained by coalition forces in 2007 and released from Iraqi custody in November 2012, provided organized training to AAH fighters. He reported to Youssef Hashim, the head of Lebanese Hezbollah Special Operations; the latter reported to Abdul Reza Shahlai (AKA Hajji yussef), the director of Iranian Qods Force External Operations. Abdul Reza Shahlai was the mastermind behind the disrupted 2011 plot to assassinate the Saudi Ambassador to the United States in Washington, DC. All reported to Qassem Soleimani, the head of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Qods-Force (IRGC-QF).
Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq is led by Qais al-Khazali, a student of Moqtada al-Sadr’s father, Mohammed Sadeq al- Sadr. Qais was detained by coalition forces in March 2007 along with Daqduq, but he was released from custody in early 2010. Additionally, Mohammed al-Tabatabai, Akram al-Kaabi, Laith al-Khazali (the brother of Qais), and Hassan Salem remain part of AAH’s core leadership. Kazim al-Abadi joined the organization after leaving the Sadrist Trend sometime prior to 2010.
AAH is resurgent. The group represents a significant threat to U.S. interests and any U.S. presence in Iraq, given its continued record of lethal activity, its Khomeinist ideology, and its current political ascension. Moreover, the group offers a vehicle for increased Iranian influence in political and religious affairs.
During the Iraq War, Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq adamantly opposed U.S. occupation. Now that the bulk of the U.S. military has withdrawn, AAH’s current objectives are assessed to be:
• To maintain a friendly Shi’a-controlled Iraqi state.
• To eclipse the Sadrist Trend as the principal champion of Shi’a religious activism.
• To promote the religious and political principles of the Iranian Revolution inside and beyond Iraq.
• To advance Iranian political and religious influence in Iraq.
• To expel the remaining U.S. military and diplomatic presence from the country.
After the withdrawal of U.S. forces in December 2011, AAH announced the intention to halt armed resistance and formally join the Iraqi political process. Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki facilitated this transition through outreach to Qais al-Khazali. AAH has adopted the Lebanese Hezbollah model to garner popular support. In 2012, AAH rebranded itself as a nationalist Islamic resistance organization, expanding its outreach among Iraq’s minorities and establishing political offices throughout the country. It also assumed the role of a charitable organization. AAH has, consequently, grown rapidly as a political group.
Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq and the Sadrists have competed for dominance as the champions of Shi’a religious activism in Iraq since 2006. This competition has escalated following AAH’s move into politics, as demonstrated by a political assassination campaign in 2012. This campaign also indicates the current operational status of AAH’s militia, which the group has maintained despite its turn towards politics. This militia is likely led by Hassan Salem, and it is capable of projecting influence by force within Iraq, and likely into Lebanon and Syria at Iran’s behest.
￼￼6
WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG
￼
￼ExECUTIVE SUMMARy
MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
AAH has accumulated a large political presence within Baghdad since 2010. It currently operates two political offices in the city, one in Kadhimiya and one in Rusafa. These offices oversee all AAH political activity in the capital as components of a larger Political Bureau. Additionally, AAH has held a number of public events that have been attended by AAH core leadership and representatives from the Iraqi government. Political activity in Baghdad has largely been used to promote AAH’s new public image as a nationalist Islamic resistance organization.
Outside of Baghdad, AAH has established political offices in Basra, Najaf, Hillah, al-Khalis, and Tal Afar. Furthermore, the organization has dispatched political delegations to meet with tribal and minority leaders in provinces of Dhi Qar, Muthanna, and Maysan. The political expansion of AAH throughout Iraq demonstrates the organization’s ability to penetrate areas with heavy Sadrist support. According to an interview with al- Mada Newspaper, however, AAH will not be participating in the 2013 provincial elections as an independent entity. This move, if true, is surprising given AAH’s political expansion. It may either reflect that AAH is not organizationally prepared to compete or that the group seeks to exercise political influence by other means. Indirect participation may allow AAH to posture for the much more significant 2014 parliamentary elections.
AAH has also made concerted efforts to influence regional Shi’ite religious networks. The establishment of the “Seal of the Apostles” religious school network in Iraq has allowed AAH to coordinate and control the dissemination of AAH religious and political thought in Baghdad, Maysan, Basra, Dhi Qar, Najaf, and Samawah. AAH is again using religious networks for recruitment and propaganda purposes as a method of political activism. In this way, AAH subtly promotes Iranian regime interests while cultivating a nationalist public identity.
Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq also expanded its political activities into Lebanon. By early 2011, AAH established a political representation in Beirut, headed by Sheikh Ammar al-Delphi. He met with a number of senior members of Lebanese Hezbollah, Hamas, Shi’ite religious organizations, and the Lebanese government that year. The extension of AAH throughout Iraq and into Lebanon suggests that the organization receives substantial Iranian funding and support. AAH once again plays an integral role in Iran’s regional proxy strategy, augmenting Lebanese Hezbollah in the struggle for Syria. Iranian-backed Shi’a militants, including elements that would become AAH, had previously participated directly in the 2006 war between Lebanon and Israel. Ali Mussa Daqduq was crucial in the solidification and training of AAH between 2005 and 2007.
The resurgence of AAH is an alarming development in Iraq because of the group’s objectives and close ties to the IRGC-QF. Looking ahead to 2013, AAH will continue to marginalize Moqtada al-Sadr and usurp Sadrist support within Iraq. If successful, AAH will emerge as the principal Shi’a activist organization in Iraq. As such, it will enhance Iranian political and religious influence in Iraq and greatly augment Iran’s regional proxy strategy. An enriched and militarily capable AAH militia may also threaten any U.S. presence in Iraq today, including its diplomatic presence. AAH is likely to become an increasingly capable and unrestrained proxy force that enhances other Iranian regional interests over time.
￼￼WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG 7
￼
￼MIDDLE EAST SECURITY REPORT 7
THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ By Sam Wyer
The withdrawal of U.S. troops on December 18, 2011 drastically altered the political and security environment in Iraq. The absence of American forces left some counter-occupation insurgent groups without a primary foreign enemy or plethora of military targets, causing them to rethink their goals and reshape their public image. It also accelerated political competition among Iraq’s leaders. Sunni militant groups including al-Qaeda in Iraq have re-emerged in an environment free from the threat of U.S. Special Forces.
￼Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq (AAH), also known as “the League of the Righteous,” has also re-emerged. This Iranian-backed, Shi’a militant organization has claimed responsibility for over 6,000 attacks against U.S. and Coalition forces in Iraq since its creation in 2006.1 AAH carried out spectacular and highly sophisticated operations during the peak of the Iraq War, including the October 10, 2006 mortar attack on American Forward Operating Base Falcon; the May 6, 2006 downing of a British Lynx helicopter in Basra, resulting in five British fatalities; the January 20, 2007 attack on the Karbala Provincial Headquarters, resulting in the capture and then murder of five American soldiers; and the May 29, 2007 attack on the Iraqi Finance Ministry, which ended in the kidnapping of five British contractors, four of whom were killed in captivity.2
Along with Kata’ib Hezbollah (KH) and the Promised Day Brigades (PDB), AAH is an Iraqi Shi’a militant group funded, armed, and trained by the Qods Force, the external Special Operations branch of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corp. Qais al-Khazali reported to the Qods Force Deputy Commander, Abdul Reza Shahlai (AKA Hajji yussef) through Qais’ liaison Ali Mussa Daqduq.3 During their peak, these Shi’a militant groups were Iran’s primary proxy weapons against the United States’ presence in Iraq, defined by their widespread use of explosively formed penetrators (EFPs), improvised rocketed-assisted mortars (IRAMs), and high-profile kidnappings and executions. They were characterized as a principal threat stream during the Iraq War, making their recent resurgence particularly alarming.
During the Iraq War, AAH violently opposed the U.S. occupation. AAH metamorphosed into a proactive political and religious organization immediately following the withdrawal of U.S. troops. Within a week of the U.S. withdrawal, AAH’s leader and co-founder Qais al-Khazali announced the termination of armed resistance and the intention to join the political process in Iraq.4 Since the announcement, AAH has expanded at an unprecedented and alarming rate. Today, AAH has expanded its influence through political, religious, and cultural resistance with support from Iran. Thus, while Iran has historically projected influence in Iraq by supporting a variety of proxy forces, the rapid expansion of AAH suggests that the Islamic Republic has consolidated its efforts behind this group.
Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq formed after a split within the Sadrist Movement between Qais al-Khazali, a student of Ayatollah Mohammed Sadeq al-Sadr, and his son, Moqtada al-Sadr. The group still maintains close religious allegiances to Mohammed Baqir al-Sadr and Mohammed Sadeq al-Sadr, two of the most influential modern Iraqi Shi’a clerics. In a departure from the Sadrists, however, AAH overtly displays its commitment to figures of the “tradition of the Iranian Revolution,” including Ruhollah Khomeini, Ali Khamenei, Kazim al- Haeri, and Mahmoud Hashemi Shahroudi. They are likewise strong proponents of the Guardianship of the Jurists (vilayet-e faqih), the dominant expression of political Islam in Iran.5 Fundamentally, AAH is a Khomeinist organization that seeks to create a suitable environment for the return of Imam Mahdi through the imposition of
￼WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG
9
￼
￼10
WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG
MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
￼strict Shi’a Islamic governance.6 In contrast, the Sadrist Trend does not openly display any allegiance to Iran.
AAH’s current objectives may be best described in terms of political influence within Iraq. First, the group will promote a Shi’a-controlled Iraqi state. Second, AAH seeks to replace the Sadrist Trend as the principal champion of Shi’a religious activism, inheriting the legacy of Mohammed Sadeq al-Sadr. Third, as a proponent of vilayat al-fiqh, AAH will promote Iranian political and religious influence in Iraq and advance the Iranian Islamic Revolution. AAH also aims to facilitate Iranian lethal support to other regional allies and proxies; and to expel the remaining U.S. military and diplomatic presence from the country.
To accomplish these objectives, AAH has undertaken a multi-pronged strategy characteristic of Lebanese Hezbollah before it took a place in government. AAH has maintained an operational militia while expanding its political, social, and religious activities in an attempt to secure its influence and enhance its status in Iraq. The importance of this group has not diminished, and its resurgence may point to the expansion of Iranian influence in Iraq. At a minimum, AAH’s resurgence suggests an attempt by the group to influence the future of Iraq through political and religious involvement. In the worst case, AAH represents a significant move by Iran to expand, penetrate, and transform Shi’a networks not only throughout Iraq, but the region as a whole. AAH seems to have become an integral part of Iran’s multi-pronged proxy strategy to project influence in the region.
Furthermore, as Iran continues to increase its influence in Iraq, the expansion of AAH provides Iran with an ideal and historically loyal proxy that can be used to increase control over political and religious networks. Such networks will become more susceptible to Iranian manipulation as provincial and parliamentary elections approach and Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani’s ailing health and old age have many preparing for his death. AAH will likely be used to facilitate a rapid increase in Iranian influence in the aftermath of such events. While the extent of AAH’s power in Iraq has yet to be seen, its
recent expansion should be seen as an disquieting development in the progress of post-withdrawal Iraq.
AAH has rebranded itself from anti-Western armed resistance force to that of an Iraqi nationalist political organization. AAH’s core identity is not nationalist, however, and its elevation to politics does not signify a departure from militancy. Despite pledges no longer to use weapons, AAH remains adamant about never surrendering them to the government of Iraq. In effect, the organization’s move to politics is not a complete reversal, but rather the continuation of the same course by more subtle means. AAH intends to influence in Iraq’s next provincial and parliamentary elections, scheduled for 2013 and 2014 respectively. yet it may do so not through direct participation. On November 28, Adnan al-Dulaimi, the head of AAH’s Political Bureau, announced in an interview with al-Mada Newspaper that AAH will not participate in the 2013 provincial elections as an independent political entity or as part of a joint list.7 Given the recent expansion of AAH’s political activities in Iraq, this decision is surprising.
If true, such a move could reveal that AAH does not feel organizationally prepared to compete. Alternatively, it may reflect a strategic decision by AAH, Nouri al-Maliki, or Iran to maintain political influence in Iraq outside of direct participation in the electoral system. In any case, AAH will likely attempt to exert leverage in the provincial elections. AAH can still project influence in certain provinces without exposing themselves to scrutiny by supporting specific candidates and political coalitions. Indirect participation may allow AAH to posture for the much more significant 2014 parliamentary elections.
Additionally, AAH has begun to penetrate Iraqi Shi’ite religious networks. Given the group’s violent history in the insurgency, its radical, Khomeinist Shi’ite ideology, and direct connections to Iranian material support, AAH’s resurgence demands further scrutiny, for it may affect the future of U.S. policy in Iraq and throughout the Levant.
￼￼
￼MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
￼This report highlights AAH’s recent expansion in Iraq. It outlines AAH’s current leadership and the impact these specific individuals have on the overall direction of the organization. It then documents the geographic expansion of AAH and the significance of its political and religious activities in Iraq and Lebanon. This report examines the factors accelerating AAH’s resurgence. Specifically, it emphasizes AAH’s ongoing conflict with the Sadrist Movement; its relationship with Maliki; and its role in Iran’s proxy strategy both in Iraq and throughout the region. The report concludes with important political considerations regarding AAH’s new role in Iraq, including the effects of the Syrian civil war and the future growth of the organization.
SECTION I: THE MOvE TO POLITICS
Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq’s leadership reemerged in Iraq, appearing publicly in Najaf to formally announce their move to politics less than one week after the completion of the U.S. withdrawal.8 On December 26, 2011 AAH’s General Secretary Qais al-Khazali stated in a public press conference in Najaf that his organization planned to participate in the political process in Iraq.9 Al-Khazali’s public announcement launched a widespread media campaign that looked to reintroduce AAH to the Iraqi people as the organization responsible for the removal of U.S. forces in Iraq and the one that is able to repair Iraq. AAH has exploited its purported role in forcing the U.S. withdrawal in order to gain legitimacy and political support in a manner similar to both Lebanese Hezbollah and the Sadrist Trend.
The decision to join politics did not come by surprise; in fact, it involved a nearly three-year period of prisoner swaps, negotiations, and broken promises of reconciliation with the government of Iraq and the United States. Between 2007 and 2008, a large portion of AAH’s core leadership was captured by U.S. and Coalition forces. Most prominently, a British-led raid on March 20, 2007 in Basra resulted in the arrests of AAH leader Qais al-Khazali, his brother Laith al-Khazali, and Lebanese Hezbollah member Ali Mussa Daqduq, who had been tasked by the Iranian Qods Force with overseeing the training of Iraqi Shi’a militant groups.10
Soon after the Basra raid, however, AAH staged one of their most successful and sophisticated attacks to date. On May 29, 2007, over 100 AAH militants raided the Ministry of Finance in Baghdad and kidnapped Peter Moore, a British computer consultant, and his four security guards. The high level of sophistication and coordination of the attack led many to assert that the Iranian Qods Force, a long time financier and trainer of AAH, helped plan and execute the attack.11 The attack’s success enabled AAH to leverage these prisoners over the next three years in order to secure the release of hundreds of its members and prominent leaders, including Laith al-Khazali and Abdul Hadi al-Daraji in June 2009 and Hassan Salem and Saleh al-Jizani in July 2009.12
Ultimately by the end of 2009, hundreds of AAH members had been freed in exchange for the bodies of the executed British hostages, a decision made easier by numerous statements from AAH pledging to renounce violence and put down their arms.13 This also coincided with the transfer of Coalition detainees to the Iraqi legal system.14 Combined with AAH’s successful political negotiations, these conditions favored the release of prominent AAH members. At that time, General Ray Odierno stated, “we believe Asa’ib al-Haq has taken initial steps to reconcile with the government of Iraq.”15 Viewed in retrospect, these steps indicate a well- executed political ploy by AAH and were quickly overturned following Qais al-Khazali’s release in January 2010.16
Qais al-Khazali regained control of his organization, and AAH quickly withdrew from the U.S.-facilitated reconciliation talks with Maliki after a U.S.-Iraqi Special Forces raid resulted in the arrest of two of its members.17 In response, AAH kidnapped Iraqi-American military contractor Issa T. Salomi on January 23, 2010.18 With its entire core leadership free, including Qais al- Khazali, Laith al-Khazali, Akram al-Kaabi, and Mohammed al-Tabatabai, AAH no longer had any incentive to continue with reconciliation talks or fulfill its promise to hand over its arms. At some point soon after Qais al-Khazali’s release, AAH leadership reportedly moved to Iran where they continued to direct armed attacks against U.S.
￼WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG
11
￼
￼12
WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG
MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
￼forces, Sadrists, and Iraqi political figures.19 In the end, AAH’s pledge to end armed resistance was by no means upheld, and was instead used as political leverage to reconstruct their organization fully.
In late December 2011, AAH leadership relocated to Baghdad where it hosted a massive public demonstration in Baghdad’s Tahrir Square on January 1, 2012 in celebration of the completed withdrawal of U.S. forces in Iraq. Titled the “Victory and Liberation Festival,” this public celebration was the first indication of AAH’s resurgence and foreshadowed the organization’s growing presence in Baghdad.20 At the same time, AAH leadership began giving numerous interviews to both Iraqi and Western press where they rebranded AAH as a “nationalist Islamic resistance group” that will “monitor the government, criticize it when it makes mistakes, represent the needs of the Iraqi people, and work to achieve their rightful demands.”21 While it previously relied on anti-American rhetoric, AAH’s new nationalistic focus demonstrates a concerted effort to reframe and reshape its public image in the face of the U.S. withdrawal.
In all, AAH’s entrance into politics ignited a rapid resurgence of the one of Iraq’s deadliest militant groups under a different guise. This move is, however, part of a grander Iranian-guided strategy that looks to influence Iraqi affairs and manipulate Shi’a networks regionally. As will be seen in the following section, much of AAH’s original leadership remains in full control of the organization, demonstrating that while the organization has redefined its public image, its fundamental principles remain unchanged.
CURRENT LEADERSHIP
According to a public interview with Akram al- Kaabi, a deputy leader of Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq, the organization began to form sometime after the August 2004 Battle of Najaf, during which Moqtada al-Sadr temporarily halted all Jaish al- Mahdi military operations after suffering heavy causalities.22 In disagreement, Qais al-Khazali, Akram al-Kaabi, Abd al-Hadi al-Darraji, and Mohammed al-Tabatabai broke from JAM and the Sadrist Trend and formed the “Khazali Faction,”
also known as Ahl al-Kahf, or the “People of the Cave.”23 (See Index of AAH Figures for an list of prominent individuals). This faction was formalized under Iranian guidance and became known as Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq in 2006.24 Following Qais al- Khazali’s arrest in March 2007, Akram al-Kaabi took over leadership of AAH and was eventually joined by Laith al-Khazali, Qais’ brother, after his release in June 2009.25 During this time, Akram Al-Kaabi and Laith al-Khazali maintained AAH’s armed resistance in Iraq and successfully negotiated the release of Qais al-Khazali in 2010, which immediately strengthened AAH and fully reunited AAH’s old leadership.26
Board of Trustees
Currently, Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq is led by a council- based “Board of Trustees” that is tasked with electing the General Secretary and overseeing all AAH activity.27 Based on interviews, media reports, prominence in public events, and previous leadership roles, it can be deduced that the current Board of Trustees consists of at least five members: Qais al-Khazali, General Secretary; Mohammed al- Tabatabai, deputy and likely second-in-command; Kazim al-Abadi, deputy and likely third-in- command; Akram al-Kaabi; and Laith al-Khazali. Of these individuals, all except Kazim al-Abadi are known to have had prominent roles in AAH since the formation of the Khazali Faction in 2004.28 Furthermore, all except Laith al-Khazali are known to be former students and aides of Mohammed Sadeq al-Sadr, the father of Moqtada al-Sadr, before his assassination in 1999.29
Since December 2011, Qais al-Khazali, Mohammed al-Tabatabai, and Kazim al-Abadi have made public appearances in Najaf, Baghdad, Diyala, Mosul, and Basra.30 Despite western news reports stating AAH leadership is living in Iran, it is likely that these three individuals are currently living in Baghdad, based on the large volume of AAH activity and their reoccurring public appearances in the city, as outlined in the map on page 17.31 Neither Akram al-Kaabi nor Laith al-Khazali appear to have made public statements or appearances in 2012.
￼￼
￼MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
￼In the past year, Kazim al-Abadi has risen in importance within AAH, and his prominence at most major AAH public events suggests that he is a leading member.32 Furthermore, al-Abadi has been labeled as the rais or head of the organization by Iraqi media, and he has delivered at least one sermon an AAH mosque in al-Aamel, Baghdad.33 While information on al-Abadi’s past is largely unknown, it is assessed that he was a student of Mohammed Sadeq al-Sadr and classmates with Qais al-Khazali, Akram al-Kaabi, Mohammed al-Tabatabai, and Moqtada al-Sadr in the 1990s.
Al-Abadi was an important figurehead for the Sadrist Trend in Nasiriya, Najaf, and Baghdad in the late 1990s.34 After Moqtada al-Sadr revived the organization in 2003, al-Abadi became one of the top spokesmen and directors of the Office of the Martyr al-Sadr (OMS) in Baghdad.35 While the details of their fallout are unclear, at some point prior to 2011 al-Abadi split from Moqtada al-Sadr’s movement to join AAH. In January 2011, Moqtada al-Sadr was asked in a publicly posted letter about the allegiances of Sheikh Kazim al-Abadi and Sheikh Abdul Razzaq al-Naddawi.36 In his response, Moqtada confirmed the loyalty of al-Naddawi, but neglected to mention Kazim al-Abadi.
Militia
Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq maintains an operational militia, likely led by Hassan Salem, a known AAH militant who was released from U.S. custody in July 2009. He is identified as al-qayadi al-jihadi, or the jihadist leader, suggesting that the organization may direct its militia using a system similar to Lebanese Hezbollah’s “Jihad Council.”37 Furthermore, AAH was known to have divided their militia into “battalions” during the Iraq War, each operating in a specific region in Iraq: Imam Askari Battalion in Samarra; Musa al-Kazim Battalion in Baghdad; Imam Ali Battalion in Najaf; and Abu Fadl Abbas Battalion in Maysan.38 Media reports also indicate that Abu Mustapha al-Sheibani, the Qods-Force- backed arms smuggler and logistician who provided lethal weapons to AAH in 2006 and 2007, and Isma’il Hafiz al-Lami (AKA Abu Dura), a former Shi’a death-squad leader, had returned to Iraq from Iran in order to join the AAH militia in 2010.39
Their whereabouts and role as of November 2012 are not attested.
Furthermore, in late December 2011 Qais al- Khazali met with Hashem Abu Alaa and Adnan al-Hamidawi, alleged leaders of Kata’ib Hezbollah (KH), the most elite and secretive of the Iranian- backed Shi’a militant groups, immediately following their release.40 Despite the secrecy of current AAH militia organization, the involvement of high-profile AAH and KH leaders suggests that AAH may have restructured its armed wing and consolidated control as an umbrella organization for Shi’a militants in Iraq.41 If such a restructuring has occurred, it may be used to harbor militants such as Sheibani, Abu Dura, and Ali Mussa Daqduq as AAH begins to solidify legitimacy as a lawful political organization.
Of particular concern is Ali Mussa Daqduq, who has been accused of training and abetting Qais al-Khazali and AAH and who played a major role in the January 20, 2007 attack in Karbala.42 The Iraqi government released Daqduq in November 2012 after claiming that it no longer had any legal basis to hold him under house arrest.43 The release of Daqduq heightens the relevance of AAH. The organization can be used to facilitate and protect Daqduq’s travels between Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, and possibly Syria, allowing him to circulate among Qods-force backed groups, train their leadership and cadre, and teach specialized skills while serving as a liaison between AAH, the Qods Force, and Lebanese Hezbollah. AAH’s past and current relationship with Lebanon is explored further in Section II.
Political Bureau
With its turn to politics, Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq has created an expansive political network used to coordinate and oversee all AAH political activity in Iraq, including all charity, cultural, and religious services. The AAH Political Bureau, examined below, has established offices in Baghdad, al-Hillah, Najaf, al-Khalis, Tal Afar, and Basra. Adnan Faisal al-Dulaimi, the head of the bureau, has made numerous public statements on behalf of AAH and has been present at nearly every major televised
￼WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG
13
￼
￼MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
￼￼ASA’IB AHL AL-HAq KEy fIGURES
￼￼￼BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Qais al-Khazali- Secretary General of AAH. Former student and aide of Sadeq al-Sadr. Arrested on March 20, 2007 but released in January 2010 in exchange for British captive Peter Moore. Likely residing in Baghdad.
Sayyid Mohammed al-Tabatabai-Deputy Leader of AAH (2nd in command). Former student and aide of Sadeq al-Sadr. Likely residing in Baghdad.
Kazim al-Abadi-Deputy Leader of AAH (3rd in command). Former student and aide of Sadeq al-Sadr. Likely residing in Baghdad.
Akram al-Kaabi-Deputy Leader of AAH. Controlled AAH during Qais al- Khazali’s detainment between March 20, 2007 and January 2010. Location unknown on publication date.
Laith al-Khazali- Deputy Leader of AAH. Controlled AAH during Qais al- Khazali’s detainment between March 20, 2007 and January 2010. Brother of Qais al-Khazali. Location unknown on publication date.
POLITICAL BUREAU
Adnan Faisal al-Dulaimi- Head of AAH political bureau. Lead AAH
political official.
Muayad al-Khazraji- Spokesman for AAH political bureau. Former student of Sadeq al-Sadr and senior aide to Moqtada al-Sadr. Arrested by Coalition forces in 2003, released in 2004.
Ali Abu Saif al-Mohammedawi- Executive Director of Rusafa Representative Office.45
Jawad al-Talabawi- AAH militant released from U.S. custody March 2010. Brother of Mahdi al-Talabawi. Director of Rusafa Representative Office. 46
Ahmed Mohsen al-Fareiji- Senior official of Rusafa Representative Office. 47
Ammar al-Delphi- Head of AAH Representative Office in Beirut, Lebanon and Director of AAH Center for Studies in Beirut.
Salem al-Maliki- AAH liaison to the Iraqi government during prisoner negotiations 2008-2010.
RELIGIOUS
Sheikh Rhiyad al-Bahadli- Imam of Abdullah al-Radiya Mosque in al-
Khalis, Diyala Province, Iraq.
Sheikh Hamid al-Quraishi- Imam of Abdullah al-Radiya Mosque in al- Khalis, Diyala Province, Iraq.
Ayatollah Afif Nablusi- Shi’a cleric based in Lebanon. Primary funder of the AAH Center for Studies in Beirut, Lebanon.48
Abu Jaafar- Head of Religion Department of Rusafa Representative Office. 49
Hatem al-Kanani- Official of Religion Department of Rusafa Representative Office.50
￼￼CLERICAL, SPIRITUAL, IDEOLOGICAL LEADERS
Grand Ayatollah Mohammed Baqir al-Sadr- Iraqi cleric born in al- Kadhimiya. Father-in-law of Moqtada al-Sadr. Executed by Saddam Hussein in 1980.
Mohammed Sadeq al-Sadr- Iraqi cleric born in al-Kadhimiya. Father of Moqtada al-Sadr, leader of the Sadrist Trend. Assassinated by Saddam Hussein in Najaf in 1999.
Grand Ayatollah Kazim al-Haeri- An Iraqi cleric born in Karbala who currently resides in Qom, Iran. Former student of Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr and close associate to Sadeq al-Sadr.
Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Ali Khamenei- Supreme Leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Sayyid Ruhollah Khomeini- First Supreme Leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran and leader of the 1979 Iranian Revolution.
Musa al-Sadr- Iranian-Lebanese Shi’a leader. Suspected to have been murder by Gaddafi regime in Libya.
Hassan Nasrallah- Secretary General of Lebanese Hezbollah. MILITIA
Hassan Salem- AAH Jihadist Leader. Released by Coalition forces on July 29, 2009 with AAH militant Saleh al-Jizan.
Bashar al-Safi- AAH militia leader. Assassinated July 10, 2012 in Iskan, Baghdad by suspected Sadrist gunmen.
Isma’il Hafiz al-Lami (AKA Abu Dura)- Shi’a militant leader in Sadr City. Fled to Iran in 2007. Status on publication date unknown.
Ali Mussa Daqduq- Lebanese Hezbollah leader and AAH advisor and militia trainer. Captured in Basra in 2007 but released and transferred to Iraqi custody in December 2011. Cleared of all charged in May 2012. Released from custody in November 2012.
Abu Mustafa al-Sheibani- Iraqi-Iranian Shia militia leader who ran smuggling routes between Iraq and Iran. Possibly returned to Iraq in 2010 to join AAH militia. Status on publication date unknown.
Mahdi al-Talabawi- AAH militant released from U.S. custody March 2010. Brother of Jawad al-Talabawi. Status on publication date unknown. 51
Saleh al-Jizani- AAH militant released from custody in July 2009. Status on publication date unknown.
Adnan Taj Shallal Sharhan- AAH militant leader in al-Karkh, Baghdad. Initially escaped from al-Taji prison in 2010, later recaptured in Baladruz District, Diyala Province in January 2011. Status on publication date unknown.
Hashem Abu Alaa- Senior official of Kata’ib Hezbollah. Released December 2011. Status on publication date unknown.52
Adnan al-Hamidawi- Senior official of Kata’ib Hezbollah. Released December 2011. Status on publication date unknown.53
￼￼￼￼￼￼14 WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG
￼
￼MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
￼AAH political event.44 While AAH core leadership will attend most important political and religious functions, smaller events, media statements, and meetings are tasked to AAH Political Bureau officials such as Adnan al-Dulaimi, Ammar al- Delphi, and Muayad al-Khafaji. In all, the Political Bureau is AAH’s most apparent development since the withdrawal of U.S. forces and has been used to reshape and promote AAH’s new public image and nationalistic rhetoric.
Examination of AAH’s current leadership and organizational structure shows that while AAH has created and expanded a political bureau, it has retained the same core leadership and control over a militia, and has maintained a dangerously anti-Western ideology. In September 2012, Qais al-Khazali made a public statement directly threatening U.S. interests in Iraq in response to an offensive anti-Muslim film.54 AAH also held demonstrations in al-Khalis, Diyala, and Kadhimiya, Baghdad, calling for the removal of all U.S. diplomatic missions from Iraq.55 Such threats reveal the dual nature of AAH. On one hand, AAH has reshaped their public image and increased their political, religious, and charitable services. On the other, AAH still has the capability to threaten U.S. interests in Iraq. Despite the formal withdrawal of American forces, the U.S. still maintains a large diplomatic mission as well as a small Special Forces contingent in the country.56 Such personnel could be targeted by AAH.
In sum, the continuation of AAH core leadership suggests the preservation of old networks throughout Iraq, Iran, and Lebanon. Such connections reveal a vehicle for the further expansion of Iranian influence. AAH’s resurgence should not be seen as the radical transformation and reconciliation of a once extremely dangerous insurgent group. In reality, AAH has taken advantage of political opportunities and freedom of action that were not available before the withdrawal of U.S. forces. By refocusing on political participation and religious dissemination, AAH has found a successful method of retaining influence in Iraq.
SECTION II: AAH POLITICAL ACTIvITy
Qais al-Khazali’s December 2011 statement in Najaf set off a campaign that has propelled Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq to political prominence in many cities throughout Iraq. In the last year, AAH has established a strong foothold in Baghdad, created political representations in numerous major Iraqi cities, sent delegations to many other provinces, and has even expanded into Beirut, Lebanon. Growth of the AAH Political Bureau demonstrates the organization’s new strategy: by creating a widespread political network throughout Iraq and into Lebanon, AAH is able to provide services, political representation, religious guidance, and security to portions of Iraqi Shi’ites and minorities in a public and legal manner. Furthermore, AAH has undertaken an extensive propaganda campaign to co-opt the legacy of Mohammed Sadeq al-Sadr in an effort to hijack segments of Moqtada al-Sadr’s constituency and spread Iranian influence throughout Iraqi politics and society. AAH’s political activity in the last year points to the manifestation of a multi-pronged strategy of influence facilitated by the lack of U.S. forces and accelerated by Iranian support.
Baghdad
Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq’s political presence in Baghdad has steadily spread since the January 1, 2012 event in Tahrir Square in Baghdad. Several months later, AAH hosted another large ceremony in Tahrir Square marking the opening of their first political office in Rusafa on April 26th. Similar to the January 1st event, this ceremony was well-publized and well-attended by leading AAH members and Iraqi media.57 Among those in attendance were Qais al- Khazali, Kazim al-Abadi, Adnan Feihan Dulaimi, Jawad al-Talabawi, Mahdi al-Talabawi, and a representative to Mahmoud Hashemi Shahroudi, an Iraqi-Iranian cleric in Qom and member of the Iranian Guardian Council.58 In a similar fashion, AAH opened a political office in al-Karkh on June 4, 2012, with a public ceremony in Kadhimiya that was attended by Qais al-Khazali, Bashar al-Safi, and Kamal al-Saidi, an Iraqi MP from Maliki’s State of Law Coalition.59 The opening ceremonies for these offices included numerous speeches by
￼WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG
15
￼
￼16
WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG
MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
￼￼AAH POLITICAL ORGANIzATION
￼AAH leadership, representatives, and other guests and concluded with a small military procession in which an AAH militant presents Qais al-Khazali with a captured American weapon. During the al- Karkh opening event, AAH militant Bashar al-Safi led the military presentation.60 One month later, al- Safi was assassinated by suspected Sadrist gunmen in Iskan, Baghdad, an area that experienced intense Shi’a militant fighting between 2005 and 2007.61
The AAH representative offices in Rusafa and al- Karkh control the eastern and western halves of the city, respectively, typical for many political parties in Baghdad. The locations of these offices and their associated public ceremonies help illustrate areas of AAH influence in Baghdad. The map of Baghdad on the following page shows the surmised geographic locations of AAH’s political activities in Baghdad, which have been concentrated in Kadhimiya, Rasheed, and Mustansirya. On September 23, 2012, AAH hosted an event at a university in Mustansirya marking the anniversary of Ayatollah Khomeini’s death.62
The locations of prominent AAH presence have significant underlying implications due to the sectarian cleansing Baghdad experienced during the Iraq War. AAH initially expanded its influence in Shi’a dominated areas along the banks of the Tigris. Kadhimiya, the location of AAH’s al- Karkh office, contains the shrines of two Shi’a Imams, Musa al-Kadhim and Mohammed al-Taqi, and is considered one of the holiest sites in Shi’a Islam. Historically, Kadhimiya has been a crucial stronghold for the Sadrist Movement, where JAM helped provide security to the al-Kadhimiya Mosque and services to local residents.63 The establishment of a strong AAH presence in the district suggests that the Sadrist Movement has been unsuccessful in stemming the expansion of one of their main rivals and may be losing ground.64 AAH presence on the eastern banks of the Tigris runs north into Sadr City, which has sparked a number of firefights in the area in the last year.
In the summer of 2012, AAH expanded its activity into southwest Baghdad, areas on the sectarian
￼￼
￼MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
fault line.65 According to Iraqi media reports, AAH militants stormed the Sunni Sabatayn Mosque in al- Aamel district in August 2012 and barred all Sunni Muslims from entering.66 Almost immediately following the seizure of the mosque, Qais al-Khazali, Mohammed al-Tabatabai, and Kazim al-Abadi all gave Friday sermons calling for national unity and preaching about the need for cultural resistance against western infiltration.67 The takeover of the Sabatayn Mosque is an alarming development in the progression of AAH activity in Baghdad and demonstrates the organization’s willingness once again to use intimidation and violence to achieve political goals.68 Moreover, the takeover of the Sabatayn Mosque suggests a heightened sense of security for AAH in Baghdad and is reminiscent of the sectarian tension in Baghdad during the Iraq War.
In sum, AAH has rapidly created a strong foothold in Baghdad. The creation of political offices and the
ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ ACTIVITY IN BAGHDAD December 2011 - November 2012
presence of AAH core leadership at public political events and sermons demonstrate the organization’s current sense of security. Such activities were not feasible in Baghdad prior to the withdrawal of U.S. and Coalition forces. The new public image of AAH has come in response to growing public support, funding, and internal security, all of which hints at support for the organization from Iran and potentially elements within the Iraqi government. Furthermore, recent Iraqi media reports accuse Maliki of providing a security details to all senior leaders of the organization in an effort to increase AAH’s freedom of movement between Sadr City, Hurriya, and 9 Nissan, as well as to augment its rivalry with the Sadrist Movement.69 According to these reports, the security details contain bodyguards from the Iraqi Ministry of the Interior and government-plated SUVs.70 While such reports are unconfirmed, AAH leadership has nevertheless been able to travel and appear in public with increasing levels of comfort.
Shula
MANSOUR
1
Iskan
Yarmouk
A’amel
2
RASHEED
1
3
9 NISSAN
KARADAH
WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG
17
Kadhimiya
2
2
KADHIMIYAH
ADHAMIYAH
Mustansirya
1
4
RUSAFA
SADR CITY
KARKH
Saydiyah
Tahrir Square
AAH controlled territory
Clashes between AAH and Sadrists
AAH - Sadrist Assassinations 1 10 July 2012: AAH militia leader Bashar
al-Safi shot dead in Iskan, Baghdad
2 8 June 2012: Asad Mohammad, secretary to Deputy Speaker of Parliament Qusay al-Suhail, shot dead in Saidiya, Baghdad
AAH Political Offices
1 April 2012: AAH opens office in Rusafa,
Baghdad to represent east Baghdad
2 June 2012: AAH opens office in al-Karkh, Baghdad to represent west Baghdad
AAH Political Events and Rallies
1 1 January 2012: AAH holds political rally in Tahrir Square, Baghdad celebrating withdrawal of U.S. forces
2 26 April 2012: AAH holds celebration for the opening of its al-Karkh office, possibly near Kadhimiya, Baghdad
3 4 June 2012: AAH holds celebration in Tahrir Square for the opening of its Rusafa office
4 23 September 2012: AAH hosts celebra- tion for the anniversary of Khomeni’s death in Mustansirya, Baghdad
AAH Friday Sermons at Sabatayn Mosque in Amal District, Baghdad
3 August 2012: Qais al-Khazali
10 August 2012: Mohammad al-Tabatabai 12 September 2012: Kazim al-Abadi
￼18
WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG
MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
￼Outside Baghdad
Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq expanded their political activities to Iraqi cities outside of the capital after the establishment of the representative office in al-Karkh in June 2012. In July, an office opened in al-Hillah representing Babil Province.71 In September, offices opened in al-Khalis and Tal Afar representing Diyala and Ninawa Provinces, respectively.72 Then in November, AAH opened an office in Basra.73 Additionally, AAH has sent delegations to the city of Mosul and the provinces of Dhi Qar, Muthanna, and Maysan.74 The stated goal of these activities is to “be in touch with all parties and ethnic groups in the province.”75 As a way of promoting its nationalistic identity, AAH has repeatedly called for a national assembly to unite Iraq. AAH’s new focus on nationalism may be an attempt to appeal to Iraqi nationalists who oppose foreign influence. Thus, by establishing relationships with various ethnic and social groups, AAH has begun to successfully create a localized but nationally connected network throughout Iraq. Furthermore, the locations of AAH offices in Iraq mirror the areas where the Sadrist Trend dominated the 2009 provincial elections, in which they won 43 of 440 seats in the 2009 provincial elections with heavy concentrations in Najaf, Maysan, Dhi Qar, and Baghdad.76
Most recently, Qais al-Khazali traveled to Basra in November 2012 in order to open a new AAH political office in the city. Similar to the Baghdad events, the opening ceremony was attended by local pro-Maliki politicians including Abdul Salam Zine al-Abidine, the representative to the governor of Basra for religious affairs, and Mahmoud al- Maksusi, a member of the State of Law Coalition and head of the Economic Commission of the Basra Provincial Council.77 In his speech, Qais al- Khazali praised the 2006 downing of the British Lynx helicopter as a sign of the city’s historic commitment to resistance. While continuing his sharp criticism of the current government, Qais, for the first time, called for the formation of joint electoral lists, likely in preparation for the upcoming provincial elections.78 Furthermore, the presence of State of Law officials and the opening of an office in Basra may foreshadow a political
alliance between AAH and Maliki’s State of Law Coalition, which dominated in Basra in the last provincial elections in 2009, winning 20 out of 35 seats.79 AAH’s relationship with Maliki is discussed further in Section IV.
AAH presence outside of Baghdad has been focused in Shi’a-dominated areas around Baghdad and in the south, with the exception of AAH’s office in the predominantly Sunni city of Tal Afar in northern Iraq. Tal Afar is only 37 miles from the Syrian border, however, which may shed light on AAH’s true reason for establishing an office that far north. Over the past year, reports have surfaced about the presence of Iraqi Shi’a militants in Syria. In June 2012, Moqtada al-Sadr publically denied reports claiming Jaish al-Mahdi fighters were operating in Syria but insisted that “splinter” groups could be involved, a likely reference to AAH.80 Since that statement, numerous media reports have indicated that Iraqi Shi’a fighters are traveling to Syria via Iran or Najaf to aid Bashar al-Assad.81 While AAH has neither confirmed nor denied the presence of its members in Syria, its strong Iranian backing makes involvement plausible. As Syria’s closest ally, Iran has taken lead in mobilizing support for the Syrian government through shipping arms, giving financial support, and mobilizing Shi’a militants by facilitating travel and recruitment.82
AAH is likely operating to some degree in Syria. Whether to protect the shrine of Sayyida Zeinab, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib, in Damascus or under direct orders from Iran, the presence of Iraq’s once largest and deadliest Shi’a militant group in Syria would not be a surprise and would allow them to interact directly with operators from the Lebanese Hezbollah.83 Furthermore, in November 2012 AAH announced its desire to expand further into Ninawa, which may point to an increased effort to create an operational area near the Syrian border in order to commandeer well-established smuggling routes through Jabal Sinjar and al-yarubiyah.84
Thus far, AAH political activity outside of Baghdad has focused on promoting and expanding the reach of its social services to Shi’a communities and various minorities in Iraq. yet AAH has met publicly with a number of Sunni leaders,
￼￼
￼MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ ACTIVITY OUTSIDE BAGHDAD December 2011 - November 2012
AAH Provincial Offices
1 July 2012: AAH opens office in Hillah to
represent Babil province
2 September 2012: AAH opens office in al-Khalis to represent Diyala province
3 September 2012: AAH opens office in Tal Afar to represent Ninewa province
4 October 2012: AAH opens Department of Religious Schools in their Najaf Representation
5 November 2012: AAH opens office in Basra AAH Political Events
and Rallies
26 December 2011: AAH announces 1 plan to join political process at a public
press conference in Najaf
2 15 September 2012: AAH hosts protest over anti-Islam film in al-Khalis
AAH Friday Sermons at Abdu Allah al-Radiya Mosque in al-Khalis
21 September 2012: Rhiyad al-Bahadli 28 September 2012: Hamid al-Quraishi 12 October 2012: Hamid al-Quraishi
AAH - Sadrist Assassination Campaign
1 28 June 2012: Sadrist Trend member Abdul Sattar al-Bahadli shot dead in Basra
2 2 July 2012: AAH member Haider Kazim Majidi shot dead in Najaf
3 4 August 2012: Sadrist Trend member Jawad Kassab shot dead in Najaf
Tal Afar
3
IRAQ
Mosul
including Mahdi Sumaidaie, a leader of the Iraqi Salafist group the Sunni Endowment for Islamic Affairs, who was ultimately assassinated by an IED attack in yarmouk, Baghdad in August 2012.85 By reaching out to various ethnic and religious groups within Iraq, AAH is likely attempting to bolster its nationalist image. AAH’s rhetoric has focused on building a “better society” and repairing the failed Iraqi political system by uniting all ethnic and religious groups.86
Throughout the past year, AAH leadership has been involved in a number of meetings with tribal and minority leaders in Iraq. In April, Qais al- Khazali held a joint press conference in Baghdad with Sattar Jabbar, the leader of the Sabean Mandaeans, a minority group that has faced extreme persecution in Iraq since the fall of Saddam.87 The following month, AAH sent a delegation to Maysan Province to meet with the Mandaeans in order to
“build bridges of love between the two religions,” renounce sectarian conflict, and pledge to amend the Iraqi political system.88 Assuming they are providing the Mandaeans, who are guaranteed one seat in the Baghdad provincial election, with some level of services and security, AAH may be attempting to gain leverage over individual seats in next year’s provincial elections. In any case, such meetings demonstrate AAH’s current move to shift its public image from a hardline militant organization to a service provider, similar to what Hezbollah did in Lebanon. Furthermore, the networks formed through these activities will likely be used for political coordination in Iraq’s upcoming elections.
Lebanon
For the first time, Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq has established an overt branch outside of Iraq. Since its incorporation sometime between 2010 and
WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG
19
Al-Khalis
2
2
Baghdad
Hillah
1 31
2 4 Najaf
Amarah
Samawah
Nasiriyah
51
Provinces with AAH political activity
Basra
￼MIDDLE EAST SECURITy REPORT 7 | THE RESURGENCE OF ASA’IB AHL AL-HAQ | SAM WyER | DECEMBER 2012
￼early 2011, the AAH Representative Office in Beirut has been the organization’s hub for regional political activity. Headed by Sheikh Ammar al- Delphi, the office has both attended and hosted a number of political events and high-level meetings in Beirut. Since March 2011, al-Delphi has been involved with at least 15 meetings or political events
in Beirut.89 Al-Delphi has met with a number of high-level officials from Hezbollah and Hamas as well as members of both the Lebanese and Iranian Governments (see Timeline of Ammar al-Delphi Meetings and Events). Al-Delphi also attended AAH’s January 1, 2012 event in Baghdad.90 His presence indicates the connection between AAH- Beirut and AAH core leadership.
FIGURE 5: TIMELINE OF AMMAR AL-DELPHI MEETINGS AND EVENTS91
￼TIMELINE Of AMMAR AL-DELPHI MEETINGS AND EvENTS91
￼￼￼￼￼